To�all�of�the�wonderful�students�who�have�shared�their�stories�and�lives
with�us�and�whose�openness�and�willing�engagement�have�taught�us
more�about�life�design�than�we�ever�could�have�imagined.
To�my�wife,�Cynthia,�who�told�me�to�take�the�job�at�Stanford;�I�love�you
and�wouldn’t�be�the�person�I�am�without�you.
–Bill�Burnett
To�my�dear�wife,�Claudia,�the�true�literary�force�in�our�house,�who�refused
to�let�me�not�write�this�book�and�has�tirelessly�reminded�me�why.�Your
love�has�redeemed�me�again�and�again.
–Dave�Evans
Contents
Cover
Title�Page
Copyright
Dedication
Introduction:�Life�by�Design
1.�Start�Where�You�Are
2.�Building�a�Compass
3.�Wayfinding
4.�Getting�Unstuck
5.�Design�Your�Lives
6.�Prototyping
7.�How�Not�to�Get�a�Job
8.�Designing�Your�Dream�Job
9.�Choosing�Happiness
10.�Failure�Immunity
11.�Building�a�Team
Conclusion:�A�Well-Designed�Life
Acknowledgments
Notes
Introduction:�Life�by�Design
Ellen�liked�rocks.�She�liked�collecting�them,�sorting�them,�and�categorizing�them
according�to�size�and�shape,�or�type� and�color.�After� two�years� at�a�prestigious
university,�the�time�came�for�Ellen�to�declare�her�major.�She�had�no�idea�what�she
wanted�to�do�with�her�life�or�who�she�wanted�to�be�when�she�grew�up,�but�it�was
time�to�choose.�Geology�seemed�like�the�best�decision�at�the�time.�After�all,�she
really,�really�liked�rocks.
Ellen’s�mother�and�father�were�proud�of�their�daughter,�the�geology�major,�a�future
geologist.�When�Ellen�graduated,�she�moved�back�home�with�her�parents.�She�began
babysitting�and�dog�walking�to�make�a�little�money.�Her�parents�were�confused.
This�is�what�she�had�done�in�high�school.�They�had�just�paid�for�an�expensive
college� education.� When� was� their� daughter� going� to� turn� magically� into� a
geologist?�When�was�she�going�to�begin�her�career?�This�is�what�she�had�studied
for.�This�is�what�she�was�supposed�to�do.
The�thing�is—Ellen�had�realized�she�didn’t�want�to�be�a�geologist.�She�wasn’t�all
that�interested�in�spending�her�time�studying�the�earth’s�processes,�or�materials,�or
history.� She� wasn’t� interested� in� fieldwork,� or� in� working� for� a� natural-resource
company� or� an� environmental� agency.� She� didn’t� like� mapping� or� generating
reports.�She�had�chosen�geology�by�default,�because�she�had�liked�rocks,�and�now
Ellen,�diploma�in�hand,�frustrated�parents�in�her�ear,�had�absolutely�no�idea�how
to�get�a�job�and�what�she�should�do�with�the�rest�of�her�life.
If�it�was�true,�as�everyone�had�told�her,�that�her�college�years�were�the�best�four
years�of�her�life,�Ellen�had�nowhere�to�go�but�down.�She�did�not�realize�that�she
was�hardly�alone�in�not�wanting�to�work�in�the�field�in�which�she�had�majored.�In
fact,� in� the� United� States,� only� 27� percent� of� college� grads� end� up� in� a� career
related�to�their�majors.�The�idea�that�what�you�major�in�is�what�you�will�do�for�the
rest�of�your�life,�and�that�college�represents�the�best�years�of�your�life�(before�a�life
of� hard� work� and� boredom),� are� two� of� what� we� call� dysfunctional� beliefs—the
myths�that�prevent�so�many�people�from�designing�the�life�they�want.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�Your�degree�determines�your�career.
Reframe:�Three-quarters�of�all�college�grads�don’t�end�up�working�in�a�career
related�to�their�majors.
By�her�mid-thirties,�Janine�was�really�starting�to�reap�the�benefits�of�decades�of
dedication.�She’d�jumped�on�the�fast�track�early�and�had�managed�to�stay�there.
She�was�a�graduate�of�a�top�college�and�a�top�law�school,�had�joined�a�firm�that�did
important�and�influential�work,�and�was�on�her�way�to�really�“making�it.”�College,
law�school,�marriage,�career—everything�in�her�life�had�turned�out�exactly�as�she
had� planned,� and� her� willpower� and� hard� work� had� given� her� everything� she
wanted.�She�was�the�picture�of�success�and�achievement.
But�Janine�had�a�secret.
Some�nights,�after�driving�home�from�the�law�firm�that�bore�one�of�the�most
recognizable�names�in�Silicon�Valley,�she�would�sit�out�on�the�deck�as�the�lights�of
the� valley� came� on,� and� cry.� She� had� everything� she� thought� she� should� have,
everything� that� she� thought� she� wanted,� but� she� was� profoundly� unhappy.� She
knew�she�should�be�ecstatic�with�the�life�she�had�created,�but�she�wasn’t.�Not�even
close.
Janine�imagined�that�there�was�something�wrong�with�her.�Who�wakes�up�every
morning�the�picture�of�success,�and�goes�to�bed�every�night�with�a�knot�in�her
stomach,�feeling�as�if�there’s�something�missing,�something�that�got�lost�along�the
way?�Where�do�you�turn�when�you�have�everything�and�nothing�all�at�the�same
time?�Like�Ellen,�Janine�held�a�dysfunctional�belief.�She�believed�that�if�she�rode
all� the� merry-go-rounds� and� grabbed� for� all� the� brass� rings� she� would� find
happiness.�Janine�is�also�not�alone.�In�America,�two-thirds�of�workers�are�unhappy
with�their�jobs.�And�15�percent�actually�hate�their�work.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�If�you�are�successful,�you�will�be�happy.
Reframe:�True�happiness�comes�from�designing�a�life�that�works�for�you.
Donald�had�made�his�money.�He�had�worked�for�more�than�thirty�years�at�the
same� job.� His� home� was� almost� paid� off.� His� children� had� all� graduated� from
college.�His�retirement�funds�had�been�carefully�invested.�He�had�a�solid�career
and�a�solid�life.�Get�up,�go�to�work,�pay�the�bills,�go�home,�go�to�bed.�Wake�up�the
next�day�and�do�it�all�again.�Lather.�Rinse.�Repeat.
For�years�Donald�had�been�asking�the�same�question�over�and�over.�He�carried
this�question�with�him�to�coffee�shops,�to�the�dinner�table,�to�church,�and�even
into� his� local� bar,� where� a� few� fingers� of� Scotch� would� quiet� the� question.� But
always�it�would�return.�For�close�to�a�decade,�the�question�had�woken�him�up�at
2:00�a.m.�and�stood�with�him�in�front�of�the�bathroom�mirror—“Why�the�hell�am�I
doing�this?”
Not� once� had� the� guy� looking� back� at� him� in� the� mirror� ever� had� a� good
answer.�Donald’s�dysfunctional�belief�was�related�to�Janine’s,�but�he’d�held�on�to�it
for� much� longer—a� life� of� responsible� and� successful� work� should� make� him
happy.�It�should�be�enough?�But�Donald�had�another�dysfunctional�belief:�that�he
couldn’t�stop�doing�what�he’d�always�done.�If�only�the�guy�in�the�mirror�could
have�told�him�that�he�was�not�alone,�and�he�did�not�have�to�do�what�he�had�always
done.� In� the� United� States� alone,� more� than� thirty-one� million� people� between
ages�forty-four�and�seventy�want�what�is�often�called�an�“encore”�career—work�that
combines�personal�meaning,�continued�income,�and�social�impact.�Some�of�those
thirty-one�million�have�found�their�encore�careers,�and�many�others�have�no�idea
where�to�begin,�and�fear�it’s�too�late�in�life�to�make�a�big�change.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�It’s�too�late.
Reframe:�It’s�never�too�late�to�design�a�life�you�love.
Three�people.�Three�big�problems.
Designers�Love�Problems
Look�around�you.�Look�at�your�office�or�home,�the�chair�you�are�sitting�on,�the
tablet� or� smartphone� you� may� be� holding.� Everything� that� surrounds� us� was
designed�by�someone.�And�every�design�started�with�a�problem.�The�problem�of
not�being�able�to�listen�to�a�lot�of�music�without�carrying�around�a�suitcase�of
CDs�is�the�reason�why�you�can�listen�to�three�thousand�songs�on�a�one-inch�square
object�clipped�to�your�shirt.�It’s�only�because�of�a�problem�that�your�phone�fits
perfectly�in�the�palm�of�your�hand,�or�that�your�laptop�gets�five�hours�of�battery
life,�or�that�your�alarm�clock�plays�the�sound�of�chirping�birds.�Now,�the�annoying
sound�of�an�alarm�clock�may�not�seem�like�a�big�problem�in�the�grand�scheme�of
things,�but�it�was�problem�enough�for�those�who�didn’t�want�to�start�each�day�with
the�harsh�beeping�of�a�typical�alarm�clock.�Problems�are�why�you�have�running
water�and�insulation�in�your�home.�Plumbing�was�created�because�of�a�problem.
Toothbrushes� were� invented� because� of� a� problem.� Chairs� were� created� because
someone,�somewhere,�wanted�to�solve�a�big�problem:�sitting�on�rocks�causes�sore
bottoms.
There’s� a� difference� between� design� problems� and� engineering� problems.� We
both�have�engineering�degrees,�and�engineering�is�a�good�approach�to�solving�a
problem�when�you�can�get�a�great�deal�of�data�and�you’re�sure�there�is�one�best
solution.�Bill�worked�on�the�problem�of�engineering�the�hinges�on�Apple’s�first
laptops,�and�the�solution�he�and�his�team�came�up�with�made�those�laptops�some
of�the�most�reliable�on�the�market.�The�solution�required�many�prototypes�and
lots� and� lots� of� testing,� similar� to� the� design� process,� but� the� goal� of� creating
hinges�that�would�last�five�years�(or�opening�and�closing�ten�thousand�times)�was
fixed,�and�his�team�tested�many�different�mechanical�solutions�until�they�met�their
goal.�Once�this�goal�was�met,�the�solution�could�be�reproduced�millions�of�times.
It�was�a�good�engineering�problem.
Compare�this�with�the�problem�of�designing�the�first�laptop�that�had�a�“built-in
mouse.”�Because�Apple’s�computers�relied�on�the�mouse�to�do�almost�everything,
building� a� laptop� that� required� you� to� be� wired� up� to� a� regular� mouse� was
unacceptable.� This� was� a� design� problem.� There� was� no� precedent� to� design
toward,�there�was�no�fixed�or�predetermined�outcome;�there�were�plenty�of�ideas
floating� around� the� lab,� and� a� number� of� different� designs� were� tested,� but
nothing�was�working.�Then�along�came�an�engineer�named�Jon�Krakower.�Jon�had
been� tinkering� around� with� miniaturized� trackballs,� and� had� the� crazy� idea� to
push�the�keyboard�to�the�back�of�the�unit,�leaving�just�enough�room�to�squeeze�in
this�tiny�pointing�device.�This�turned�out�to�be�the�big�breakthrough�everyone�had
been�looking�for,�and�has�been�part�of�the�signature�look�of�Apple�laptops�ever
since.1
Aesthetics,� or� the� way� things� look,� is� another� obvious� example� of� a� problem
with�no�one�right�solution�that�designers�work�on.�For�instance,�there�are�a�lot�of
high-performance�sports�cars�in�the�world,�and�they�all�evoke�a�sense�of�speed,�but
a�Porsche�doesn’t�look�anything�like�a�Ferrari.�Both�are�expertly�engineered,�both
contain�almost�identical�parts,�but�each�has�a�completely�different�aesthetic�appeal.
The�designers�at�each�company�take�exquisite�care�with�every�curve�and�line,�every
headlight�and�grille,�but�they�make�very�different�decisions.�Each�company�works
in� its� own� way—a� Ferrari� has� an� unmistakably� passionate� Italian� look,� and� a
Porsche�a�fast,�exacting�German�sensibility.�Designers�study�aesthetics�for�years�in
order�to�make�these�industrial�products�the�equivalent�of�moving�sculpture.�That’s
why,�in�some�ways,�aesthetics�is�the�ultimate�design�problem.�Aesthetics�involves
human�emotion—and�we’ve�discovered�that�when�emotions�are�involved,�design
thinking�has�proved�to�be�the�best�problem-solving�tool.
When�we�were�faced�with�the�problem�of�helping�our�students�leave�college�and
enter�the�world�as�productive�and�happy�people—to�figure�out�just�what�the�hell�to
do�with�the�life�in�front�of�them—we�knew�design�thinking�would�be�the�best�way
to�solve�this�particular�problem.�Designing�your�life�doesn’t�involve�a�clear�goal,
like�creating�hinges�that�last�five�years,�or�building�a�giant�bridge�that�will�safely
connect�to�landmasses;�those�are�engineering�problems,�in�which�you�can�get�hard
data�on�your�options�and�engineer�the�one�best�solution.
When�you�have�a�desired�outcome�(a�truly�portable�laptop�computer,�a�sexy-
looking� sports� car,� or� a� well-designed� life)� but� no� clear� solution� in� sight,� that’s
when� you� brainstorm,� try� crazy� stuff,� improvise,� and� keep� “building� your� way
forward”�until�you�come�up�with�something�that�works.�You�know�it�when�you�see
it,�whether�it’s�the�harmonious�lines�of�a�Ferrari�or�the�ultra-portable�MacBook
Air.�A�great�design�comes�together�in�a�way�that�can’t�be�solved�with�equations�and
spreadsheets�and�data�analysis.�It�has�a�look�and�feel�all�of�its�own—a�beautiful
aesthetic�that�speaks�to�you.
Your�well-designed�life�will�have�a�look�and�a�feel�all�of�its�own�as�well,�and
design�thinking�will�help�you�solve�your�own�life�design�problems.�Everything�that
makes� our� daily� living� easier,� more� productive,� more� enjoyable,� and� more
pleasurable�was�created�because�of�a�problem,�and�because�some�designer�or�team
of�designers�somewhere�out�there�in�the�world�sought�to�solve�that�problem.�The
spaces�we�live�in,�work�in,�and�play�in�were�all�designed�to�make�our�life,�work,�and
play� better.� No� matter� where� we� look� in� our� external� world,� we� can� see� what
happens�when�designers�tackle�problems.
We�can�see�the�benefits�of�design�thinking.
And�you’re�going�to�see�the�benefits�of�design�thinking�in�your�own�life.�Design
doesn’t�just�work�for�creating�cool�stuff�like�computers�and�Ferraris;�it�works�in
creating�a�cool�life.�You�can�use�design�thinking�to�create�a�life�that�is�meaningful,
joyful,�and�fulfilling.�It�doesn’t�matter�who�you�are�or�were,�what�you�do�or�did�for
a� living,� how� young� or� how� old� you� are—you� can� use� the� same� thinking� that
created�the�most�amazing�technology,�products,�and�spaces�to�design�your�career
and� your� life.� A� well-designed� life� is� a� life� that� is� generative—it� is� constantly� creative,
productive,�changing,�evolving,�and�there�is�always�the�possibility�of�surprise.�You�get�out�of
it�more�than�you�put�in.�There�is�a�lot�more�than�“lather,�rinse,�repeat”�in�a�well-
designed�life.
How�Do�We�Know?
It�all�started�with�a�lunch.
Actually,�it�all�started�when�we�were�both�undergrads�at�Stanford�University�in
the�1970s�(Dave�a�little�earlier�in�the�decade�than�Bill).�Bill�discovered�the�product-
design�major�and�an�exciting�career�trajectory�to�go�with�it.�As�a�child,�he�used�to
draw�cars�and�airplanes�while�sitting�under�his�grandmother’s�sewing�machine,�and
when�he�majored�in�product�design,�it�was�because�he�had�discovered�(much�to�his
surprise)�that�there�were�people�in�the�world�who�did�this�kind�of�thing�every�day,
and�they�were�called�designers.�As�the�executive�director�of�the�Design�Program�at
Stanford,�Bill�is�still�drawing�and�building�things�(he’s�come�out�from�under�the
sewing� machine),� directing� the� undergraduate� and� graduate� programs� in� design,
and� teaching� at� the� d.school� (The� Hasso� Plattner� Institute� of� Design—a
multidisciplinary�hub�of�innovation�at�Stanford�where�all�the�classes�are�based�on
the� design� thinking� process).� Bill� has� also� worked� in� start-ups� and� Fortune� 100
companies,�including�seven�years�at�Apple,�designing�award-winning�laptops�(and
those� hinges)� and� a� number� of� years� in� the� toy� industry,� designing� Star� Wars
action�figures.
Bill�knows�how�lucky�he�was�to�have�discovered�product�design�and�a�joyful�and
fulfilling�career�path�so�early.�In�our�teaching�careers,�we’ve�both�come�to�see�how
rare� that� is,� and� just� how� often� it� doesn’t� work� that� way� for� students,� even� at
Stanford.
Unlike�Bill,�when�Dave�was�an�undergrad,�he�had�no�idea�what�he�was�going�to
do.� He� failed� at� being� a� biology� major� (more� on� that� later)� and� graduated� in
mechanical�engineering—frankly,�for�lack�of�a�better�idea.�During�college,�he�never
found�good�help�with�the�question�“How�do�I�figure�out�what�I�want�to�do�with
my�life?”�He�managed�to�figure�it�out�eventually,�“the�hard�way,”�and�has�enjoyed
more�than�thirty�years�in�executive�leadership�and�management�consulting�in�high
technology.�He�product-managed�the�first�mouse�and�early�laser-printing�projects
at�Apple,�was�a�co-founder�of�Electronic�Arts,�and�has�helped�lots�of�young�start-up
founders� find� their� way.� After� a� pretty� rough� start,� his� career� developed
wonderfully—but�he�always�knew�that�it�had�been�a�lot�harder�than�it�needed�to�be.
Even�though�we�both�went�off�to�start�careers�and�families,�we�continued�to
keep�a�hand�in�working�with�students.�Bill�was�at�Stanford,�where�he�watched�as
hundreds�of�students�came�through�his�office�hours�and�struggled�with�figuring
out� life� after� graduation.� Dave� was� teaching� at� UC� Berkeley,� where� he� had
developed� a� course� called� How� to� Find� Your� Vocation� (aka:� Is� Your� Calling
Calling?),�which�he�taught�fourteen�times�over�eight�years.�Still,�he�longed�to�do
more�at�Stanford.�Along�the�way,�he�and�Bill�had�intersected�time�and�again,�in
business�and�personally.�Dave�had�heard�that�Bill�had�just�accepted�the�position�of
executive�director�of�the�Stanford�Program�in�Design,�a�program�Dave�knew�well.
It�occurred�to�Dave�that�the�multidisciplinary�demands�of�being�a�designer�were
likely�to�put�design�students�under�an�unusually�heavy�burden:�trying�to�find�a
way�to�conceive�a�personally�meaningful�and�authentic,�as�well�as�commercially
viable,�career�vision.�He�decided�to�call�up�Bill�and�have�lunch�and�share�some�of
his�ideas—just�to�see�what�might�happen.�If�it�went�well,�maybe�they’d�have�more
lunches�on�the�topic,�and�in�perhaps�a�year�or�so�something�might�come�of�it.
And�that’s�why�it�all�began�at�lunch.
Five�minutes�into�that�lunch,�it�was�a�done�deal.�We�decided�we�were�going�to
partner�to�bring�a�new�course�to�Stanford,�to�apply�design�thinking�to�designing
life�after�college—first�to�design�students�and,�if�that�went�well,�then�to�all�students.
That�course�has�gone�on�to�become�one�of�the�most�popular�elective�classes�at
Stanford.
When� asked� what� we� do� at� Stanford,� we� will� sometimes� respond� with� our
carefully� crafted� elevator� reply:� “We� teach� courses� at� Stanford� that� help� any
student� to� apply� the� innovation� principles� of� design� thinking� to� the� wicked
problem�of�designing�your�life�at�and�after�university.”�And,�of�course,�they�then
say,�“Great!�What’s�that�mean?”
And�we�usually�say,�“We�teach�how�to�use�design�to�figure�out�what�you�want�to
be�when�you�grow�up.”�At�that�point�almost�everyone�says,�“Oh!�Can�I�take�the
class?!”�For�years�we’ve�had�to�say�no�to�that�question,�at�least�to�everyone�who
didn’t� happen� to� be� one� of� the� sixteen� thousand� students� at� Stanford.� That� is
finally�no�longer�the�case.�We’ve�been�offering�Designing�Your�Life�workshops�to
everyone�(www.designingyour.life),�and�we’ve�written�this�book�so�that�you�don’t
have�to�go�to�Stanford�to�have�a�well-designed�life.
But� you� do� have� to� be� willing� to� ask� yourself� some� questions.� Some� hard
questions.
Designers�Also�Love�Questions
Just�as�Donald�faced�the�mirror�every�night�and�asked�himself,�“Why�the�hell�am�I
doing�this?,”�everyone�struggles�with�similar�questions�about�life,�about�work,�and
about�his�or�her�meaning�and�purpose�in�the�world.
• How�do�I�find�a�job�that�I�like�or�maybe�even�love?
• How�do�I�build�a�career�that�will�make�me�a�good�living?
• How�do�I�balance�my�career�with�my�family?
• How�can�I�make�a�difference�in�the�world?
• How�can�I�be�thin,�sexy,�and�fabulously�rich?
We�can�help�you�answer�all�these�questions—except�the�last�one.
We�have�all�been�asked,�“What�do�you�want�to�be�when�you�grow�up?”�This�is
the�fundamental�question�of�life—whether�we�are�fifteen�or�fifty.�Designers�love
questions,�but�what�they�really�love�is�reframing�questions.
Reframing�is�one�of�the�most�important�mind-sets�of�a�designer.�Many�great
innovations�get�started�in�a�reframe.�In�design�thinking�we�always�say,�“Don’t�start
with� the� problem,� start� with� the� people,� start� with� empathy.”� Once� we� have
empathy�for�the�people�who�will�be�using�our�products,�we�define�our�point�of
view,�brainstorm,�and�start�prototyping�to�discover�what�we�don’t�yet�know�about
the�problem.�This�typically�results�in�a�reframe,�sometimes�also�called�a�pivot.�A
reframe�is�when�we�take�new�information�about�the�problem,�restate�our�point�of
view,� and� start� thinking� and� prototyping� again.� You� start� out� thinking� you� are
designing� a� product� (a� new� coffee� blend� and� new� kind� of� coffee� machine)� and
reframe� when� you� realize� you� are� actually� redesigning� the� coffee� experience
(Starbucks).�Or,�in�an�attempt�to�make�an�impact�on�poverty,�you�stop�lending
money�to�the�wealthy�class�in�a�country�(as�the�World�Bank�does)�and�start�lending
money� to� people� considered� too� poor� to� pay� it� back� (micro-lending� and� the
Grameen�Bank).�Or�the�team�at�Apple�comes�up�with�the�iPad,�a�complete�reframe
of�what�the�portable�computing�experience�is�about.
In�life�design,�we�reframe�a�lot.�The�biggest�reframe�is�that�your�life�can’t�be
perfectly�planned,�that�there�isn’t�just�one�solution�to�your�life,�and�that�that’s�a
good�thing.�There�are�many�designs�for�your�life,�all�filled�with�hope�for�the�kind
of�creative�and�unfolding�reality�that�makes�life�worth�living�into.�Your�life�is�not
a� thing,� it’s� an� experience;� the� fun� comes� from� designing� and� enjoying� the
experience.
The�reframe�for�the�question�“What�do�you�want�to�be�when�you�grow�up?”�is
this:� “Who� or� what� do� you� want� to� grow� into?”� Life� is� all� about� growth� and
change.�It’s�not�static.�It’s�not�about�some�destination.�It’s�not�about�answering�the
question�once�and�for�all�and�then�it’s�all�done.�Nobody�really�knows�what�he�or
she�wants�to�be.�Even�those�who�checked�a�box�for�doctor,�lawyer,�or�engineer.
These�are�just�vague�directions�on�a�life�path.�There�are�so�many�questions�that
persist�at�every�step�of�the�way.�What�people�need�is�a�process—a�design�process—
for�figuring�out�what�they�want,�whom�they�want�to�grow�into,�and�how�to�create�a
life�they�love.
Welcome�to�Life�Design
Life� design� is� the� way� forward.� It’s� what� will� help� Ellen� move� from� her� college
major�to�her�first�job.�It’s�what�will�help�Janine�move�from�the�life�she�should�have
into�the�life�she�wants.�It’s�what�will�help�Donald�find�the�answer�to�the�questions
that�keep�him�up�at�night.�Designers�imagine�things�that�don’t�yet�exist,�and�then
they�build�them,�and�then�the�world�changes.�You�can�do�this�in�your�own�life.
You�can�imagine�a�career�and�a�life�that�don’t�exist;�you�can�build�that�future�you,
and�as�a�result�your�life�will�change.�If�your�life�is�pretty�perfect�as�is,�life�design
can� still� help� you� make� it� an� even� better� version� of� the� life� you� currently� love
living.
When�you�think�like�a�designer,�when�you�are�willing�to�ask�the�questions,�when
you� realize� that� life� is� always� about� designing� something� that� has� never� existed
before,�then�your�life�can�sparkle�in�a�way�that�you�could�never�have�imagined.
That�is,�if�you�like�sparkles.�It’s�your�design,�after�all.
What�Do�We�Know?
In� Stanford’s� Design� Program,� we� have� taught� more� than� a� thousand� students
design�thinking�and�how�to�design�their�lives.�And�we’ll�let�you�in�on�a�secret—no
one�has�ever�failed�our�class.�In�fact,�it’s�impossible�to�flunk.�We�have�more�than
sixty�years�of�combined�teaching�experience,�and�we�have�taught�this�approach�to
high�school�students,�college�students,�graduate�students,�Ph.D.�students,�twenty-
somethings,�mid-career�executives,�and�retirees�wanting�an�“encore”�career.
As�teachers,�we�have�always�guaranteed�our�students�“office�hours�for�life.”�This
means�that�if�you�take�a�class�from�us�we�are�there�for�you,�forever.�Period.�We’ve
had�students�come�back�to�us�over�the�years�since�they’ve�graduated,�and�they’ve
told�us�how�the�tools,�ideas,�and�mind-sets�that�we�teach�have�made�a�difference
for�them.�We’re�quite�hopeful—and,�frankly,�pretty�confident—that�these�ideas�can
make�a�difference�for�you,�too.
But� don’t� take� our� word� for� it.� Stanford� is� a� very� rigorous� place.� Though
anecdotes� are� nice,� they� don’t� count� for� much� in� academia.� To� speak
authoritatively,�you�need�data.�Our�class�is�one�of�the�few�design�thinking�classes
that� have� been� scientifically� studied� and� have� proved� to� make� a� difference� for
students� on� a� number� of� important� measures.� Two� doctoral� students� did� their
dissertations�on�the�course,�and�what�they�found�was�pretty�exciting.2�They�found
that�those�who�took�our�class�were�better�able�to�conceive�of�and�pursue�a�career
they� really� wanted;� they� had� fewer� dysfunctional� beliefs� (those� pesky� ideas� that
hold�you�back�and�that�just�aren’t�true)�and�an�increased�ability�to�generate�new
ideas� for� their� life� design� (increasing� their� ideation� capability).� All� of� these
measures�were�“statistically�significant,”�which,�in�non-geek-speak,�means�that�the
ideas�and�exercises�we�lay�out�in�our�course�and�are�going�to�walk�you�through�in
this�book�have�been�proven�effective;�they�can�help�you�to�figure�out�what�you
want�and�show�you�how�to�get�it.
But�let’s�be�perfectly�clear�right�from�the�start.�Science�or�no�science,�this�is�all
highly�personal�stuff.�We�can�give�you�some�tools,�some�ideas,�some�exercises,�but
we�can’t�figure�it�all�out�for�you.�We�can’t�give�you�your�insights,�change�your
perspective,�and�provide�you�with�nonstop�“aha”�moments,�all�in�ten�easy�steps.
What�we�can�tell�you�is�that�if�you�actually�use�the�tools�and�do�the�life�design
exercises,�you�will�generate�the�insights�you�need�to�have.�Because�here’s�the�big
truth:�there�are�many�versions�of�you,�and�they�are�all�“right.”�And�life�design�will
help� you� live� into� whatever� version� of� you� is� now� playing� at� the� Cineplex.
Remember,�there�are�no�wrong�answers,�and�we’re�not�grading�you.�We�will�suggest
you�do�some�exercises�in�this�book,�but�there�are�no�answers�in�the�back�to�tell�you
how�you�did.�We’ve�added�a�recap�of�the�exercises�at�the�end�of�each�chapter�that
has�them—a�Try�Stuff�box—because�we�suggest�that�you,�well,�try�stuff.�That’s�what
designers�do.�We’re�not�measuring�you�against�anyone,�and�you�shouldn’t�measure
yourself�against�anyone,�either.�We’re�here�to�co-create�with�you.�Think�of�us�as
part�of�your�own�personal�design�team.
In�fact,�we�suggest�you�go�out�and�get�a�design�team�right�off�the�bat—a�group�of
people� who� will� read� the� book� with� you� and� do� the� exercises� alongside� you,� a
collaborative�team�in�which�you�support�one�another�in�your�pursuit�of�a�well-
designed�life.�We’ll�talk�about�this�more�later�in�the�book,�and�by�all�means�you
should�feel�free�to�read�it�on�your�own�first.�Many�people�think�that�designers�are
lone�geniuses,�working�in�solitude�and�waiting�for�a�flash�of�inspiration�to�show
them� the� solution� to� their� design� problem.� Nothing� could� be� further� from� the
truth.�There�may�be�some�problems,�such�as�the�design�of�a�stool�or�a�new�set�of
children’s�blocks,�that�are�simple�enough�to�be�tackled�by�an�individual,�but�in
today’s� highly� technical� world,� almost� every� problem� requires� a� design� team.
Design�thinking�takes�this�idea�even�further�and�suggests�that�the�best�results�come
from� radical� collaboration.� Radical� collaboration� works� on� the� principle� that
people�with�very�different�backgrounds�will�bring�their�idiosyncratic�technical�and
human�experiences�to�the�team.�This�increases�the�chance�that�the�team�will�have
empathy�for�those�who�will�use�what�they�are�designing,�and�that�the�collision�of
different�backgrounds�will�generate�truly�unique�solutions.
This� is� proved� over� and� over� again� in� d.school� classes� at� Stanford,� where
graduate� students� create� teams� of� business,� law,� engineering,� education,� and
medical�students�that�come�up�with�breakthrough�innovations�all�the�time.�The
glue� that� holds� these� teams� together� is� design� thinking,� the� human-centered
approach� to� design� that� takes� advantage� of� their� different� backgrounds� to� spur
collaboration� and� creativity.� Typically,� none� of� the� students� have� any� design
background�when�they�enroll�in�our�classes,�and�all�of�the�teams�struggle�at�first�to
be�productive.�They�have�to�learn�the�mind-sets�of�a�designer—especially�radical
collaboration�and�being�mindful�of�process.�But�once�that�happens,�they�discover
that� their� abilities� as� a� team� far� exceed� what� any� individual� can� do,� and� their
creative� confidence� explodes.� Hundreds� of� successful� student� projects� and
innovative�companies,�such�as�D-Rev�and�Embrace,3�have�come�from�this�process,
and�are�proof�that�collaboration�is�the�way�design�gets�done�today.
So�be�a�genius�at�your�life�design;�just�don’t�think�you�have�to�be�one�of�those
lone�geniuses.
Think�Like�a�Designer
Before�you�can�do�life�design,�you�need�to�learn�to�think�like�a�designer.�We’ll
explain�a�few�simple�ways�to�do�this,�but�first�you�need�to�understand�one�really
big� point:� Designers� don’t� think� their� way� forward.� Designers� build� their� way
forward.�What�does�that�mean?�It�means�you�are�not�just�going�to�be�dreaming�up
a�lot�of�fun�fantasies�that�have�no�relationship�to�the�real�world—or�the�real�you.
You�are�going�to�build�things�(we�call�them�prototypes),�try�stuff,�and�have�a�lot�of
fun�in�the�process.
Want�a�career�change?�This�book�will�help�you�make�that�change,�but�not�by
sitting�around�trying�to�decide�what�that�change�is�going�to�be.�We’re�going�to
help� you� think� like� a� designer� and� build� your� future,� prototype� by� prototype.
We’re�going�to�help�you�approach�your�own�life�design�challenges�with�the�same
kind�of�curiosity�and�the�same�kind�of�creativity�that�resulted�in�the�invention�of
the�printing�press,�the�lightbulb,�and�the�Internet.
Our�focus�is�mainly�on�jobs�and�careers,�because,�let’s�face�it,�we�spend�most�of
the�hours�of�our�days,�and�the�days�of�our�lives,�at�work.�Work�can�be�a�daily
source�of�enormous�joy�and�meaning,�or�it�can�be�an�endless�grind�and�waste�of
hours�spent�trying�to�white-knuckle�our�way�through�the�misery�of�it�all�until�the
weekend�comes.�A�well-designed�life�is�not�a�life�of�drudgery.�You�weren’t�put�on
this�earth�to�work�eight�hours�a�day�at�a�job�you�hate�until�the�time�comes�to�die.
That�may�sound�a�bit�melodramatic,�but�many�people�tell�us�that�this�is�a�good
description�of�their�lives.�And�even�those�who�are�lucky�enough�to�find�a�career
they�love�often�find�that�they�are�frustrated�and�have�a�hard�time�designing�a�life
that�is�balanced.�It’s�time�to�start�thinking�differently—about�everything.
Design� thinking� involves� certain� simple� mind-sets.� This� book� will� teach� you
those�mind-sets�and�how�to�use�them�to�do�life�design.
The� five� mind-sets� you� are� going� to� learn� in� order� to� design� your� life� are
curiosity,�bias�to�action,�reframing,�awareness,�and�radical�collaboration.�These�are�your
design�tools,�and�with�them�you�can�build�anything,�including�a�life�you�love.
Be�Curious.�Curiosity�makes�everything�new.�It�invites�exploration.�It�makes
everything�play.�Most�of�all,�curiosity�is�going�to�help�you�“get�good�at�being
lucky.”�It’s�the�reason�some�people�see�opportunities�everywhere.
�
Try�Stuff.�When�you�have�a�bias�to�action,�you�are�committed�to�building�your�way
forward.�There�is�no�sitting�on�the�bench�just�thinking�about�what�you�are�going
to�do.�There�is�only�getting�in�the�game.�Designers�try�things.�They�test�things�out.
They�create�prototype�after�prototype,�failing�often,�until�they�find�what�works�and
what�solves�the�problem.�Sometimes�they�find�the�problem�is�entirely�different
from�what�they�first�thought�it�was.�Designers�embrace�change.�They�are�not
attached�to�a�particular�outcome,�because�they�are�always�focused�on�what�will
happen�next—not�what�the�final�result�will�be.
�
Reframe�Problems.�Reframing�is�how�designers�get�unstuck.�Reframing�also�makes
sure�that�we�are�working�on�the�right�problem.�Life�design�involves�key�reframes
that�allow�you�to�step�back,�examine�your�biases,�and�open�up�new�solution�spaces.
Throughout�the�book,�we�will�be�reframing�dysfunctional�beliefs�that�prevent
people�from�finding�the�careers�and�the�lives�they�want.�Reframing�is�essential�to
finding�the�right�problems�and�the�right�solutions.
�
Know�It’s�a�Process.�We�know�that�life�gets�messy.�For�every�step�forward,�it�can
sometimes�seem�you�are�moving�two�steps�back.�Mistakes�will�be�made,�prototypes
thrown�away.�An�important�part�of�the�process�is�letting�go—of�your�first�idea�and
of�a�good-but-not-great�solution.�And�sometimes�amazing�designs�can�emerge�from
the�mess.�The�Slinky�was�invented�this�way.�Teflon�was�created�this�way.�Super
Glue.�Play-Doh.�None�of�these�things�would�exist�if�a�designer�somewhere�hadn’t
screwed�up.�When�you�learn�to�think�like�a�designer�you�learn�to�be�aware�of�the
process.�Life�design�is�a�journey;�let�go�of�the�end�goal�and�focus�on�the�process�and
see�what�happens�next.
�
Ask�for�Help.�The�last�mind-set�of�design�thinking�is�perhaps�the�most�important,
especially�when�it�comes�to�designing�your�life:�radical�collaboration.�What�this
means�is�simple—you�are�not�alone.�The�best�designers�know�that�great�design
requires�radical�collaboration.�It�takes�a�team.�A�painter�can�create�an�artistic
masterpiece�alone�on�a�windswept�coast,�but�a�designer�cannot�create�the�iPhone
alone,�windswept�beach�or�not.�And�your�life�is�more�like�a�great�design�than�a
work�of�art,�so�you�cannot�create�it�alone,�either.�You�do�not�have�to�come�up�with
a�brilliant�life�design�by�yourself.�Design�is�a�collaborative�process,�and�many�of
the�best�ideas�are�going�to�come�from�other�people.�You�just�need�to�ask.�And
know�the�right�questions�to�ask.�In�this�book,�you�will�learn�how�to�use�mentors
and�a�supportive�community�to�help�with�your�life�design.�When�you�reach�out�to
the�world,�the�world�reaches�right�back.�And�this�changes�everything.�In�other
words,�life�design,�like�all�design,�is�a�team�sport.
�
Anti-Passion�Is�Our�Passion
Many�people�operate�under�the�dysfunctional�belief�that�they�just�need�to�find�out
what�they�are�passionate�about.�Once�they�know�their�passion,�everything�else�will
somehow�magically�fall�into�place.�We�hate�this�idea�for�one�very�good�reason:
most�people�don’t�know�their�passion.
Our�colleague�William�Damon,�director�of�the�Stanford�Center�on�Adolescence,
found�that�only�one�in�five�young�people�between�twelve�and�twenty-six�have�a
clear�vision�of�where�they�want�to�go,�what�they�want�to�accomplish�in�life,�and
why.4�Our�experience�suggests,�similarly,�that�80�percent�of�people�of�all�ages�don’t
really�know�what�they�are�passionate�about.
So�conversations�with�career�counselors�often�go�like�this:
Career�Counselor:�“What�are�you�passionate�about?”
Job�Seeker:�“I�don’t�know.”
Career�Counselor:�“Well,�come�back�when�you�figure�it�out.”
Some� career� counselors� will� give� people� tests� to� assess� people’s� interests� or
strengths,�or�to�survey�their�skills,�but�anyone�who�has�taken�such�tests�knows�that
the�conclusions�are�often�far�from�conclusive.�Besides,�finding�out�that�you�could
be�a�pilot,�an�engineer,�or�an�elevator�repairman�isn’t�very�helpful�or�actionable.
So�we’re�not�very�passionate�about�finding�your�passion.�We�believe�that�people
actually�need�to�take�time�to�develop�a�passion.�And�the�research�shows�that,�for
most� people,� passion� comes� after� they� try� something,� discover� they� like� it,� and
develop�mastery—not�before.�To�put�it�more�succinctly:�passion�is�the�result�of�a
good�life�design,�not�the�cause.
Most�people�do�not�have�that�one�thing�they�are�passionate�about—that�singular
motivator�that�drives�all�of�their�life�decisions�and�infuses�every�waking�moment
with�a�sense�of�purpose�and�meaning.�If�you’ve�found�that�studying�the�mating
habits�and�evolution�of�mollusks�from�the�Cambrian�period�until�the�present�day
is�your�purpose�for�living—we�salute�you.�Charles�Darwin�spent�thirty-nine�years
studying�earthworms;�we�salute�Charles�Darwin.�What�we�don’t�salute�is�a�method
of�approaching�life�design�that�leaves�out�80�percent�of�the�population.�In�truth,
most�people�are�passionate�about�many�different�things,�and�the�only�way�to�know
what�they�want�to�do�is�to�prototype�some�potential�lives,�try�them�out,�and�see
what�really�resonates�with�them.�We�are�serious�about�this:�you�don’t�need�to�know
your�passion�in�order�to�design�a�life�you�love.�Once�you�know�how�to�prototype
your�way�forward,�you�are�on�the�path�to�discovering�the�things�you�truly�love,
passion�or�not.
A�Well-Designed�Life
A�well-designed�life�is�a�life�that�makes�sense.�It’s�a�life�in�which�who�you�are,�what
you�believe,�and�what�you�do�all�line�up�together.�When�you�have�a�well-designed
life�and�someone�asks�you,�“How’s�it�going?,”�you�have�an�answer.�You�can�tell
that�person�that�your�life�is�going�well,�and�you�can�tell�how�and�why.�A�well-
designed�life�is�a�marvelous�portfolio�of�experiences,�of�adventures,�of�failures�that
taught�you�important�lessons,�of�hardships�that�made�you�stronger�and�helped�you
know� yourself� better,� and� of� achievements� and� satisfactions.� It’s� worth
emphasizing� that� failures� and� hardships� are� a� part� of� every� life,� even� the� well-
designed�ones.
We’re�going�to�help�you�figure�out�what�a�well-designed�life�looks�like�for�you.
Our�students�and�clients�tell�us�it’s�fun.�They�also�tell�us�that�it’s�full�of�surprises.
We�can�assure�you�that�at�times�it�will�take�you�out�of�your�comfort�zone.�We’re
going�to�ask�you�to�do�things�that�may�feel�counterintuitive,�or�at�the�very�least
different�from�what�you’ve�been�taught�in�the�past.
Curiosity
Bias�to�action
Reframing
Awareness
Radical�collaboration
What�happens�when�you�do�these�things?�What�happens�when�you�engage�in
life� design?� Actually,� something� quite� extraordinary� happens.� Things� you� want
start�to�show�up�in�your�life.�You�start�to�hear�of�job�openings�you�were�dreaming
about.�People�you�were�interested�in�meeting�just�happen�to�be�in�town.�What�is
happening� here?� For� starters,� it’s� that� “getting� good� at� being� lucky”� thing� we
mentioned�earlier,�a�result�of�curiosity�and�awareness,�and�a�by-product�of�using
the�five�mind-sets.�In�addition,�the�process�of�discovering�who�you�are�and�what
you�want�has�a�rather�extraordinary�effect�on�your�life.�There�will�be�effort�and
action�involved,�no�doubt,�but�it�will�seem,�rather�surprisingly,�as�if�everyone�is
conspiring�to�help�you.�And,�by�being�aware�of�the�process,�you�will�have�a�lot�of
fun�along�the�way.
—
All�through�the�process�of�life�design,�we�will�be�right�here�with�you.�To�guide�you.
To� challenge� you.� We’re� going� to� give� you� the� ideas� and� tools� you� need� for
designing�your�way�through�life.�We’re�going�to�help�you�find�your�next�job.�Your
next�career.�Your�next�big�thing.�We’re�going�to�help�you�design�your�life.�A�life
that�you�love.
1
Start�Where�You�Are
There’s� a� sign� over� the� design� studio� at� Stanford� that� says� You� Are� Here.� Our
students�love�that�sign.�You�might�say�it’s�somewhat�clarifying.�It�doesn’t�matter
where�you�come�from,�where�you�think�you�are�going,�what�job�or�career�you�have
had� or� think� you� should� have.� You� are� not� too� late,� and� you’re� not� too� early.
Design� thinking� can� help� you� build� your� way� forward� from� wherever� you� are,
regardless�of�the�life�design�problem�you�are�facing.�But�before�you�can�figure�out
which� direction� to� head� in,� you� need� to� know� where� you� are� and� what� design
problems�you�are�trying�to�solve.�As�we’ve�shown,�designers�love�problems,�and
when�you�think�like�a�designer,�you�approach�problems�with�an�entirely�different
mind-set.�Designers�get�juiced�by�what�they�call�wicked�problems.�They’re�called
wicked� not� because� they� are� evil� or� fundamentally� bad,� but� because� they� are
resistant�to�resolution.�Let’s�face�it,�you’re�not�reading�this�book�because�you�have
all�the�answers,�are�in�your�dream�job,�and�have�a�life�imbued�with�more�meaning
and�purpose�than�you�can�imagine.�Somewhere,�in�some�area�of�your�life,�you�are
stuck.
You�have�a�wicked�problem.
And�that’s�a�wonderful�and�exciting�place�to�start.
Problem�Finding�+�Problem�Solving�=�Well-Designed�Life
In�design�thinking,�we�put�as�much�emphasis�on�problem�finding�as�we�do�on
problem�solving.�After�all,�what’s�the�point�of�working�on�the�wrong�problem?�We
emphasize� this� because� it’s� actually� not� always� so� easy� to� understand� what� our
problems�are.�Sometimes�we�think�we�need�a�new�job�or�a�new�boss,�but�often�we
don’t�really�know�what’s�working�and�what’s�not�in�our�lives.�Often�we�approach
our�problems�as�if�they�are�an�addition�or�subtraction�problem.�We�either�want�to
get�something�(add)�or�get�rid�of�something�(subtract).�We�want�to�get�a�better�job,
get�more�money,�get�more�success,�get�more�balance,�get�rid�of�ten�pounds,�get�rid
of�our�unhappiness,�get�rid�of�our�pain.�Or�we�might�just�have�a�vague�sense�of
discontent,�or�a�feeling�that�we�want�something�different�or�something�more.
—
Usually,�we�define�our�problem�by�what’s�missing,�but�not�always.�And�the�bottom
line�is�this:
You’ve�got�problems.
Your�friends�have�problems.
We’ve�all�got�problems.
Sometimes�those�problems�relate�to�our�job,�sometimes�to�family,�or�health,�or
love,�or�money,�or�any�combination�of�these�things.�Sometimes�our�problems�can
feel�so�overwhelming�that�we�don’t�even�try�to�solve�them.�We�just�live�with�them—
like�an�irritating�roommate�we�constantly�complain�about�but�never�get�around�to
evicting.�Our�problems�become�our�story,�and�we�can�all�get�stuck�in�our�stories.
Deciding�which�problems�to�work�on�may�be�one�of�the�most�important�decisions
you� make,� because� people� can� lose� years� (or� a� lifetime)� working� on� the� wrong
problem.
Dave�had�a�problem�once�(okay,�he’s�had�a�lot�of�problems,�and�would�say�that
this� whole� book� comes� out� of� his� astonishing� ineptitude),� but� this� particular
problem�kept�him�stuck�for�years.
Dave�started�college�at�Stanford�as�a�biology�major,�but�he�soon�realized�not
only� that� he� hated� biology� but� also� that� he� was� failing� miserably.� He� had
graduated�from�high�school�believing�that�it�was�his�destiny�to�be�a�field-research
marine�biologist.�There�were�two�people�responsible�for�this�particular�version�of
Dave’s�destiny—Jacques�Cousteau�and�Mrs.�Strauss.
Jacques�Cousteau�was�his�childhood�hero.�Dave�watched�every�episode�of�The
Undersea�World�of�Jacques�Cousteau�and�secretly�imagined�he�had�been�the�one�to
invent�the�Aqua-Lung�instead�of�Jacques.�Dave�also�really�liked�seals.�He�ended�up
believing�that�the�coolest�thing�in�the�world�would�be�to�get�paid�to�play�with
seals.�Dave�was�also�curious�about�whether�seals�had�sex�in�the�water�or�on�the
land�(only�with�the�birth�of�Google�many�years�later�did�he�learn�that�most�species
mate�on�land).
His�second�misguided�reason�for�becoming�a�marine�biologist�had�to�do�with
Mrs.�Strauss,�his�high�school�biology�teacher.�Dave�did�pretty�well�in�all�his�high
school�subjects,�but�he�liked�biology�the�best.�Why?�Because�he�liked�Mrs.�Strauss
the� best.� She� made� biology� interesting;� she� was� a� great� teacher.� And� Dave
misperceived�that�her�good�teaching�correlated�to�his�stronger�interest.�If�his�PE
teacher�had�taught�as�well�as�Mrs.�Strauss,�Dave�might�have�believed�that�it�was�his
destiny� to� hang� a� whistle� around� his� neck� and� be� an� advocate� for� mandatory
dodgeball�in�the�workplace.
So�the�unholy�union�of�Jacques�Cousteau�and�Mrs.�Strauss�caused�Dave�to�work
on�the�wrong�problem�for�over�two�years.�The�problem�he�thought�he�was�solving
was�how�to�become�a�marine�biologist,�or,�more�specifically,�how�to�inherit�the
Calypso�from�Cousteau�when�he�died.�Dave�started�college�with�the�firm�belief�that
his�future�was�in�marine�biology;�since�Stanford�didn’t�offer�a�major�in�marine
biology,�he�decided�to�major�in�biology.�He�hated�it.�At�that�time,�biology�classes
consisted�mostly�of�biochemistry�and�molecular�biology.�The�premeds�were�killing
it�in�class.�Dave�was�not.�Academically,�he�was�getting�crushed,�as�were�his�dreams
of�someday�getting�paid�to�frolic�with�the�seals�while�speaking�in�a�French�accent.
He�then�decided�that,�in�order�to�fix�his�problem�of�hating�biology�and�doing
horribly�in�his�classes,�all�he�needed�to�do�was�some�real�science:�research�in�a�bio
lab� would� get� him� a� step� closer� to� researching� the� mating� habits� of� seals.� He
crashed� his� way� into� doing� bench� research� on� RNA,� which� meant� he� basically
cleaned�test�tubes.�It�was�crushingly�boring,�and�he�was�even�more�miserable.
Quarter�after�quarter,�his�bio�teaching�assistants�and�lab�teaching�assistants�kept
asking�him�why�he�was�a�biology�major.�Dave�would�begin�to�tell�them�about�Mrs.
Strauss� and� Jacques� Cousteau� and� the� seals,� but� they� would� interrupt� and� say,
“You’re�no�good�at�bio.�You�don’t�like�it.�You�are�grumpy�and�nasty�all�the�time.
You�should�quit.�You�should�drop�this�major.�The�only�thing�you�are�good�at�is
arguing;�maybe�you�should�be�a�lawyer.”
Despite�the�tsunami�of�negative�feedback,�Dave�persisted,�because�he�had�this
set�idea�in�his�mind�of�his�destiny,�and�he�kept�working�away�at�the�“problem”�of
getting�his�grades�up�in�biology.�He�was�so�focused�on�the�what-he-had-in-mind
problem�that�he�never�looked�at�the�real�problem—he�shouldn’t�be�majoring�in
biology,�and�his�idea�of�his�destiny�had�been�misguided�from�the�beginning.
It�has�been�our�experience,�in�office�hour�after�office�hour,�that�people�waste�a
lot� of� time� working� on� the� wrong� problem.� If� they� are� lucky,� they� will� fail
miserably� quickly� and� get� forced� by� circumstance� into� working� on� better
problems.� If� they� are� unlucky� and� smart,� they’ll� succeed—we� call� it� the� success
disaster—and�wake�up�ten�years�later�wondering�how�the�hell�they�got�to�wherever
they�are,�and�why�they�are�so�unhappy.
Dave’s�failure�as�a�marine�biologist�was�so�profound�that�he�ultimately�had�to
admit�defeat�and�change�his�major.�It�took�him�two�and�a�half�years�to�address�a
problem� that� was� clear� to� everyone� else� after� about� two� weeks.� He� eventually
transferred�to�mechanical�engineering,�where�he�was�quite�successful�and�happy.
Someday,�however,�he�still�hopes�to�frolic�with�seals.
A�Beginner’s�Mind
If�Dave�had�known�to�think�like�a�designer�fresh�out�of�high�school,�he�would
have�approached�the�problem�of�his�college�major�with�a�beginner’s�mind.�Instead
of�assuming�he�knew�all�the�answers�before�he�asked�the�questions,�he�would�have
been�curious.�He�would�have�wanted�to�know�exactly�what�a�marine�biologist�does,
and�he�would�actually�have�asked�some�marine�biologists.�He�would�have�gone�to
the�Hopkins�Marine�Station�of�Stanford�(only�about�an�hour�and�a�half’s�drive
from�campus),�and�asked�how�you�go�from�a�major�in�biochemistry�to�working�in
marine�biology.�He�would�have�tried�stuff.�For�instance,�he�could�have�spent�some
time�on�the�open�sea�and�discovered�whether�it�was�as�glamorous�as�it�looked�on
television.�He�could�have�volunteered�on�a�research�vessel,�maybe�even�spent�some
time�around�some�real-life�seals.�Instead,�he�began�college�with�his�mind�(and�his
major)�made�up,�and�ended�up�learning�the�hard�way�that�maybe�his�first�idea
wasn’t�his�best.
Isn’t�that�true�for�all�of�us?�How�often�do�we�fall�in�love�with�our�first�idea�and
then�refuse�to�let�it�go?�No�matter�how�badly�it�turns�out.�More�important,�do�we
really�think�it�is�a�good�idea�to�let�our�earnest�but�misguided�seventeen-year-old
self�determine�where�we�work�for�the�rest�of�our�lives?�And�what�about�now?�How
often�do�we�go�with�our�first�idea�and�think�we�know�answers�to�questions�we’ve
never�really�investigated?�How�often�do�we�check�in�with�ourselves�to�see�if�we�are
really�working�on�the�right�problem?
“I�need�a�better�job”�is�not�the�solution�to�the�problem�of�“I’m�not�that�happy
working,�and�I’d�rather�be�home�with�my�kids.”�Beware�of�working�on�a�really
good�problem�that’s�not�actually�the�right�problem,�not�actually�your�problem.�You
don’t�solve�a�marriage�problem�at�the�office,�or�a�work�problem�with�a�new�diet.�It
seems�obvious,�but,�like�Dave,�we�can�lose�a�lot�of�time�working�on�the�wrong
problem.
We�also�tend�to�get�mired�in�what�we�call�gravity�problems.
“I’ve�got�this�big�problem�and�I�don’t�know�what�to�do�about�it.”
“Oh,�wow,�Jane,�what’s�the�problem?”
“It’s�gravity.”
“Gravity?”
“Yeah—it’s�making�me�crazy!�I’m�feeling�heavier�and�heavier.�I�can’t�get�my�bike
up�hills�easily.�It�never�leaves�me.�I�don’t�know�what�to�do�about�it.�Can�you�help
me?”
This� example� may� sound� silly,� but� we� hear� versions� of� this� sort� of� “gravity
problem”�all�the�time.
“Poets� just� don’t� make� enough� money� in� our� culture.� They’re� not� respected
enough.�What�do�I�do�about�it?”
“The�company�I�work�for�has�been�family-owned�for�five�generations.�There�is
no�way�that,�as�an�outsider,�I’m�ever�going�to�be�an�executive.�What�do�I�do�about
it?”
“I’ve�been�out�of�work�for�five�years.�It’s�going�to�be�much�harder�for�me�to�get
a�job�and�that’s�not�fair.�What�do�I�do�about�it?”
“I�want�to�go�back�to�school�and�become�a�doctor,�but�it�will�take�me�at�least�ten
years,�and�I�don’t�want�to�invest�that�much�time�at�this�stage�of�my�life.�What�do�I
do�about�it?”
These� are� all� gravity� problems—meaning� they� are� not� real� problems.� Why?
Because�in�life�design,�if�it’s�not�actionable,�it’s�not�a�problem.�Let’s�repeat�that.�If
it’s�not�actionable,�it’s�not�a�problem.�It’s�a�situation,�a�circumstance,�a�fact�of�life.
It�may�be�a�drag�(so�to�speak),�but,�like�gravity,�it’s�not�a�problem�that�can�be
solved.
Here’s� a� little� tidbit� that� is� going� to� save� you� a� lot� of� time—months,� years,
decades�even.�It�has�to�do�with�reality.�People�fight�reality.�They�fight�it�tooth�and
nail,�with�everything�they’ve�got.�And�anytime�you�are�arguing�or�fighting�with
reality,�reality�will�win.�You�can’t�outsmart�it.�You�can’t�trick�it.�You�can’t�bend�it
to�your�will.
Not�now.�Not�ever.
A�Public�Service�Announcement�About�Gravity
and�Public�Service
You’ve�heard�the�expression�“You�can’t�fight�City�Hall.”�That’s�an�old�idiom�about
gravity�problems.�Everybody�knows�you�can’t�fight�City�Hall.�“Hey!”�you�retort.
“You�can�so�fight�City�Hall!�Martin�Luther�King�fought�City�Hall.�My�friend�Phil
fought�City�Hall.�We�need�more�City�Hall�fighters—not�fewer!�Are�you�telling�us�to
give�up�on�the�hard�problems?”
You�raise�an�important�question,�so�it’s�important�to�make�clear�exactly�how�to
address�what�we’re�calling�gravity�problems.�Remember�that�the�key�thing�we’re
after� here� is� to� free� you� from� getting� stuck� on� something� that’s� not� actionable.
When� you� get� stuck� in� a� gravity� problem,� you’re� stuck� permanently,� because
there’s�nothing�you�can�do,�and�designers�are�first�and�foremost�doers.
We� recognize� that� there� are� two� variations� of� gravity� problems—totally
inactionable�ones�(such�as�gravity�itself)�and�functionally�unactionable�ones�(such
as�the�average�income�of�a�full-time�poet).�Some�of�you�are�trying�to�decide�if�the
thing�you’re�stuck�on�is�a�gravity�problem�that�isn’t�actionable,�or�just�a�really,
really�hard�problem�that�will�require�effort�and�sacrifice�and�runs�a�high�risk�of
failure�but�is�worth�trying.�Let’s�address�this�difficult�issue�by�looking�at�each�of
the�sample�gravity�problems�we�listed�above.
�
Gravity�Biking.�You�can’t�change�gravity.�You’d�have�to�relocate�the�earth’s�orbit�to
pull�that�off,�and�that’s�a�pretty�crazy�goal.�Skip�it.�Just�accept�it.�When�you�accept
it,� you� are� free� to� work� around� that� situation� and� find� something� that� is
actionable.�That�cyclist�could�invest�in�a�lighter�bicycle.�She�could�try�losing�some
weight.�She�could�learn�the�latest�techniques�for�climbing�more�effectively�(turns
out�pedaling�faster�in�really�small�gears�is�easier�and�takes�more�stamina�instead�of
more�power;�stamina�is�easier�to�build�up).
Poet�Income.�To�change�the�median�income�of�poets,�you’d�somehow�have�to�alter
the�market�for�poetry�and�get�people�to�buy�more�poetry�or�pay�more�for�it.�Well,
you�could�try�for�that.�You�could�write�letters�to�the�editor�in�praise�of�poetry.�You
could� knock� on� doors� to� get� people� out� to� the� poetry� night� at� your� local
coffeehouse.�This�one�is�a�long�shot.�Even�though�you�can�work�on�this�“problem”
in�a�way�that�wasn’t�possible�with�gravity,�we’d�recommend�that�you�accept�it�as�an
inactionable� situation.� If� you� do� that,� then� your� attention� is� freed� to� start
designing�other�solutions�to�other�problems.
Five-Year� Unemployed� Job� Seeker.� The� statistics� are� unmistakable� on� this� one.� If
you’ve�been�unemployed�a�long�time,�you�have�a�harder�task�to�get�re-employed.
Research� using� identical� résumés� with� no� difference� but� the� duration� of
unemployment�made�clear�that�most�employers�avoid�the�long-term�unemployed—
apparently,� groundlessly� concluding� that� whoever� else� didn’t� hire� you� over� that
time� must� have� had� a� good� reason.� That’s� a� gravity� problem.� You� can’t� change
employers’�perceptions.�Instead�of�changing�how�they�think,�how�about�working
on� changing� how� you� appear� to� them?� You� can� take� volunteer� roles� and� list
significant�professional�results�(without�having�to�get�into�how�little�you�were�paid
until�much�later�in�the�conversation).�You�can�identify�roles�in�industries�where
there�is�less�ageism.�(Dave�is�so�grateful�that�he�got�into�teaching�later�in�life;�now
his�age�is�seen�as�a�source�of�wisdom,�and�he’s�not�still�trying�to�pass�himself�off�as
a� marketing� expert� to� clients� half� his� age� who� know� he’s� no� digital� native� and
doesn’t� actually� “get� it”� anymore.)� Even� in� the� face� of� daunting� realities,� you
always�have�some�freedom�you�can�exercise.�Find�it�and�take�action�there,�instead
of�against�gravity.
The�Family�Firm�Outsider.�So,�for�the�last�132�years,�no�one�whose�last�name�wasn’t
Fiddleslurp�has�held�an�executive�role�in�the�company,�but�you�think�the�time�has
finally�come,�and�you’re�going�be�the�one�to�break�through.�If�you�just�do�a�great
job�and�bide�your�time,�in�three�to�five�years�that�VP�title�will�be�yours.�Okay—you
can�invest�those�three�to�five�years,�but,�please,�do�so�realizing�that�there�is�no
evidence�whatever�that�your�goal�will�be�attained.�It’s�your�call,�but�you�might�be
better�off�buying�a�lottery�ticket.�You�have�other�options.�You�can�go�down�the
road,� to� a� firm� that’s� not� family-run.� But� you� love� the� town,� and� the� kids� are
happy�in�school�where�you�are.�Okay—then�embrace�the�good�things�that�come
from�just�accepting�it.�Reframe�the�company’s�family�legacy�as�being�your�source
of�job�security,�with�a�decent�income,�in�a�dependable�firm.�Knowing�you�won’t
have� to� take� on� increased� responsibilities� in� adjusting� to� endless� promotions,
you’ll�be�able�to�learn�the�job�so�well�you�can�do�it�in�thirty-five�hours�a�week,
resulting�in�great�work-life�balance�(and�time�to�write�more�poetry!).�Or�maybe�you
look� for� greater� value� instead� of� greater� authority.� You� find� a� new� function� or
offering�that�can�grow�the�company�or�increase�profits,�and�become�the�expert—
the� go-to� person—for� running� that� part� of� the� business.� You� will� always� be� a
manager�and�never�a�VP,�but,�as�the�person�responsible�for�so�much�value,�you
could�become�the�highest-paid�manager�in�the�place.�Who�needs�a�title�if�you’re
getting�paid�what�you�want?
Ten�Years�to�the�M.D.�Again,�this�is�a�real�gravity�problem—unless�you’d�like�to�start
your�life�design�project�by�reforming�medical�school�education�(which,�by�the�way,
is�pretty�tough�to�do�if�you�don’t�already�have�an�M.D.).�No—we�wouldn’t�sign�up
for�that�one,�either.�What�you�can�do�is�change�your�thinking�and�remember�that
in� only� your� second� year� of� med� school� you� get� to� start� treating� patients� and
“doing�medicine.”�Most�of�the�doctoring�done�in�hospitals�is�done�by�the�residents
—the� trainees� who� have� finished� four� years� of� medical� school� and� gotten� their
M.D.s�and�are�now�walking�the�wards�and�apprenticing.�If�you�can’t�change�your
life�(because�of�gravity),�you�can�just�change�your�thinking.�Or�you�can�decide�to
take�a�different�route—be�a�physician’s�assistant�and�do�a�lot�of�what�doctors�do
but�at�a�fraction�of�the�training�time�and�cost.�Or�enter�the�wellness�field,�running
prevention�programs�for�a�progressive�insurance�company�and�thereby�making�a
dent�on�health�without�being�on�the�clinical-care�side�of�things.
�
The�key�is�not�to�get�stuck�on�something�that�you�have�effectively�no�chance�of
succeeding�at.�We�are�all�for�aggressive�and�world-changing�goals.�Please�do�fight
City�Hall.�Oppose�injustice.�Work�for�women’s�rights.�Pursue�food�justice.�End
homelessness.� Combat� global� warming.� But� do� it� smart.� If� you� become� open-
minded�enough�to�accept�reality,�you’ll�be�freed�to�reframe�an�actionable�problem
and� design� a� way� to� participate� in� the� world� on� things� that� matter� to� you� and
might� even� work.� That’s� all� we’re� after� here—we� want� to� give� you� the� best� shot
possible� at� living� the� life� you� want,� enjoying� the� living� of� it,� and� maybe� even
making�a�difference�while�you’re�at�it.�We�are�going�to�help�you�create�the�best-
designed� life� available� to� you� in� reality—not� in� some� fictional� world� with� less
gravity�and�rich�poets.
The�only�response�to�a�gravity�problem�is�acceptance.�And�this�is�where�all�good
designers�begin.�This�is�the�“You�Are�Here”�or�“Accept”�phase�of�design�thinking.
Acceptance.�That’s�why�you�start�where�you�are.�Not�where�you�wish�you�were.�Not
where�you�hope�you�are.�Not�where�you�think�you�should�be.�But�right�where�you
are.
The�Life�Design�Assessment
In�order�to�start�where�we�are,�we�need�to�break�life�down�into�some�discrete�areas
—health,�work,�play,�and�love.�As�we’ve�said,�we’ll�be�focusing�mostly�on�work,�but
you�won’t�be�able�to�understand�how�to�design�your�work�until�you�understand
how�it�fits�into�the�rest�of�your�life.�So,�in�order�to�start�where�we�are,�we�have�to
know�where�we�are.�We�do�this�by�taking�stock�of�our�situation—by�taking�our�own
inventory� and� making� an� assessment.� It’s� a� way� to� get� an� articulated
characterization�of�where�we�are�and�answer�the�age-old�question�“How’s�it�going?”
But�first�let’s�define�the�areas�that�will�ground�your�answer.
�
Health.�From�the�earliest�days�of�civilization,�thoughtful�people�have�recognized
that�it�pays�to�be�healthy.�And�by�“healthy”�we�mean�being�well�in�mind,�body,
and� spirit—emotional� health,� physical� health,� and� mental� health.� The� relative
importance�of�each�of�these�aspects�of�health�is�up�to�you.�How�you�measure�your
own�health�in�these�areas�is�your�call.�But�once�you’ve�figured�out�how�you�define
“health,”� you� need� to� pay� attention� to� it.� How� healthy� you� are� will� factor
significantly� into� how� you� assess� the� quality� of� your� life� when� answering� that
“How’s�it�going?”�question.
Work.� By� “work”� we� mean� your� participation� in� the� great� ongoing� human
adventure�on�the�planet.�You�may�or�may�not�be�getting�paid�for�it,�but�this�is�the
stuff� you� “do.”� Assuming� you’re� not� financially� independent,� you� usually� are
getting�paid�for�at�least�a�portion�of�your�“work.”�Don’t�for�a�minute�reduce�work
only�to�that�which�you�get�paid�for.�Most�people�have�more�than�one�form�of
work�at�a�time.
Play.�Play�is�all�about�joy.�If�you�observe�children�at�play�(we’re�talking�more�about
finger�painting�with�mud�than�about�championship�soccer�here),�you�will�see�the
type�of�play�we�are�talking�about.�Play�is�any�activity�that�brings�you�joy�when�you
do� it.� It� can� certainly� include� organized� activity� or� competition� or� productive
endeavors,�but�when�those�things�are�done�“for�the�joy�of�it”�they�are�play.�When
an�activity�is�done�to�win,�to�advance,�to�achieve—even�if�it’s�“fun”�to�do�so—it’s
not�play.�It�may�be�a�wonderful�thing,�but�it’s�still�not�play.�The�question�here�is
what�brings�you�joy�purely�in�the�doing.
Love.�We�all�know�what�love�is.�And�we�all�know�when�we�have�it�and�when�we
don’t.�Love�does�make�the�world�go�around,�and�when�it’s�lacking,�our�world�can
feel�like�it’s�not�moving�us�much.�We�won’t�attempt�to�define�love�(you�know�what
you�think�on�that,�anyway),�and�we�have�no�formulas�for�finding�your�one�true
love�(there�are�lots�of�other�books�about�that),�but�we�do�know�that�you�have�to�pay
attention� to� it.� Love� comes� to� us� in� a� wide� range� of� types,� from� affection� to
community�to�eroticism,�and�from�a�huge�array�of�sources,�from�parents�to�friends
to� colleagues� to� lovers,� but� they� all� share� that� people� thing.� That� sense� of
connection.�Who�are�the�people�in�your�life,�and�how�is�love�flowing�to�and�from
you�and�others?
So—How’s�It�Going?
There�is�no�appraisal�or�judgment�we�(or�anyone)�can�make�of�your�life�in�these
four�areas.�We’ve�all�needed�a�remodel�in�at�least�one�of�these�areas�of�life.�The
idea�is�to�pick�what�to�design�first,�and�be�curious�about�how�you�might�design
this�particular�area�of�your�life.�Awareness�and�curiosity�are�the�design�mind-sets
you�need�to�begin�building�your�way�forward.
The� exercise� below� is� going� to� help� you� figure� out� where� you� are� and� what
design�problem�you’d�like�to�tackle.�You�can’t�know�where�you’re�going�until�you
know�where�you�are.
Really.�You�can’t.
Do�the�exercise.
That’s�why�the�sign�says�You�Are�Here.
The�Health�Work�Play�/�Love�Dashboard
A�way�to�take�stock�of�your�current�situation,�the�“You�Are�Here”�for�you,�is�to
focus�on�what�we�call�the�health�/�work�play�love�dashboard.�Think�of�this�like�the
gauges�on�your�car’s�dashboard.�Gauges�tell�you�something�about�the�state�of�your
car:�Do�you�have�enough�gas�to�complete�your�journey?�Is�there�oil�in�the�engine
to�help�it�run�smoothly?�Is�it�running�hot�and�about�to�blow?�Similarly,�the�HWPL
dashboard�will�tell�you�something�about�the�four�things�that�provide�energy�and
focus�for�your�journey�and�keep�your�life�running�smoothly.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�I�should�already�know�where�I’m�going.
Reframe:�You�can’t�know�where�you�are�going�until�you�know�where�you�are.
We�are�going�to�ask�you�to�assess�your�state�of�health�and�the�ways�you�work,
play,�and�love.�Health�is�at�the�base�of�our�diagram�because,�well,�when�you’re�not
healthy,�nothing�else�in�your�life�works�very�well.�Work,�play,�and�love�are�built�on
top�of�health�and�represent�three�areas�we�think�it’s�important�to�pay�attention�to.
We� want� to� stress� that� there� is� no� perfect� balance� of� these� areas.� We� all� have
different�mixes�of�health,�work,�play,�and�love�in�our�lives�at�different�times.�A
young� single� person,� fresh� from� college,� might� have� an� abundance� of� physical
health,�lots�of�play�and�work,�but�no�meaningful�love�relationship�yet.�A�young
couple�with�children�are�going�to�play�a�lot,�but�in�a�different�way�from�when�they
were�single�or�when�they�didn’t�have�children.�And�as�we�age,�health�becomes�a
bigger�concern.�There�will�be�an�appropriate�mix�for�you,�and�you�will�have�a�sense
of�it,�at�whatever�stage�of�life�you�are�in.
When� you� think� about� health,� we� suggest� you� think� about� more� than� just� a
good�checkup�at�the�doctor’s.�A�well-designed�life�is�supported�by�a�healthy�body,
an�engaged�mind,�and�often,�though�not�always,�some�form�of�spiritual�practice.
By�“spiritual”�we�don’t�necessarily�mean�religious.�We�call�spiritual�any�practice
that�is�based�on�a�belief�in�something�bigger�than�ourselves.�Again,�there�is�no
objective� perfect� balance� of� these� different� areas� of� health,� just� a� subjective
personal�sense�that�either�“I�have�enough”�or�“Something�is�missing.”
Even� though� perfect� balance� is� not� our� goal,� a� look� at� this� diagram� can
sometimes�warn�us�that�something�is�not�right.�Like�an�emergency�light�on�your
car’s�dashboard,�the�diagram�may�serve�as�an�indicator�that�it’s�time�to�pull�over
and�figure�out�what’s�wrong.
As�an�example,�an�entrepreneur�who�we�know�named�Fred�took�a�look�at�his
dashboard� and� noticed� that� he� had� almost� no� entries� in� the� health� and� play
categories.�His�dashboard�looked�like�this:
FRED’S�DASHBOARD
Fred�had�been�careful�to�make�time�for�his�wife�and�family—start-ups�can�be
tough�on�relationships—so�he�felt�good�about�his�love�gauge.�He�was�willing�to
give�up�most�of�his�playtime,�because�he�was�“all�in”�on�his�start-up,�so�the�lack�of
balance�there�was�okay�with�him.�However,�the�assessment�helped�him�realize�that
he�had�gone�too�far,�especially�when�it�came�to�his�health,�which�was�a�red�light�on
his� dashboard.� “To� be� a� successful,� high-performance� entrepreneur,� particularly
under�the�extreme�stress�of�a�start-up,�I�can’t�afford�to�get�sick.�I�need�to�manage
my�health,�even�more�now�that�I’m�in�a�start-up.”�Fred�made�some�changes:�he
hired�a�personal�trainer,�started�working�out�three�times�a�week,�and�committed�to
listening� to� one� audio� book� a� week� on� a� challenging� intellectual� or� spiritual
subject� during� his� commute.� He� reported� more� efficiency� at� work� and� a� much
higher�job�and�life�satisfaction�with�this�new�mix.
Debbie,�a�product�manager�at�Apple�who�recently�stopped�working�to�raise�her
twin�boys,�was�surprised�to�find�her�dashboard�reassuring.�“I�thought�that,�since�I
wasn’t� ‘working’� anymore,� I� had� lost� my� ‘work’� identity.� I� realized� that� if� I
properly�valued�the�work�I�was�doing�for�the�household�and�my�kids,�then�I�was
actually�working�more�now�than�before.�And�I’m�taking�good�enough�care�of�my
body�and�my�mind�to�make�sure�that�I�get�to�enjoy�my�quality�time�with�the�twins.
This�dashboard�validates�my�choice�to�stop�working�for�money�while�my�kids�are
little.”
DEBBIE’S�DASHBOARD
So�there�are�Fred’s�and�Debbie’s�stories;�let’s�get�started�with�your�dashboard.
Your�Health�Gauge
As�we�said,�healthy�to�us�means�being�well�in�more�than�just�your�body;�you�might�want�to
take�into�account�your�mind�and�spirit,�too.�The�relative�importance�of�each�area�is�entirely
up�to�you.�Make�a�quick�assessment�of�your�health�and�then�fill�in�your�gauge—are�you�a
quarter�full,�or�half,�or�three-quarters,�or�really�full?�(Bill�has�also�filled�in�the�gauges�for�his
dashboard�as�an�example�to�reference.)
How�you�rate�your�health�will�factor�significantly�into�how�you�assess�the�quality�of�your�life
and�what�you�might�want�to�redesign�going�forward.
Health
�
�
Bill’s�example:
Health:�I’m�in�good�general�health,�had�a�good�physical�recently.�I�have�slightly
elevated�cholesterol,�I�should�lose�fifteen�pounds�to�be�at�my�ideal�weight,�I�am
not�exercising,�I�am�out�of�shape,�and�I’m�frequently�winded�if�I�have�to�run�for
the�train.�I�read�and�write�about�my�philosophy�of�life,�work,�and�love;�I�read�the
latest�research�on�the�mind�and�the�mind-body�connection,�but�I�am�losing�my
memory�faster�than�I�think�I�should.�I�say�an�affirmation�every�morning,�and�this
has�completely�changed�my�outlook�on�life.�I�have�been�in�an�intentional�men’s
group�ever�since�my�son�was�born�(twenty-one�years�ago),�and�these�men�have�been
my�guides�and�companions�on�many�spiritual�journeys.�I�rate�my�health�as�“half
full.”
Your�Work�Gauge
Make�a�list�of�all�the�ways�you�“work,”�and�then�“gauge”�your�working�life�as�a�whole.�We
are�assuming�that�there�are�things�on�your�list�that�you�are�getting�paid�to�do.�This�will
include�your�nine-to-five�job,�and�your�second�job�if�the�first�isn’t�enough,�and�any�consulting
or�advising�you�do,�etc.�If�you�are�a�regular�volunteer�in�any�organization,�figure�that�in,
too.�If�you�are�a�homemaker,�like�Debbie,�make�sure�you�remember�that�raising�children,
providing�home-cooked�meals�for�your�family,�taking�care�of�aging�parents,�and�doing
housework�are�all�forms�of�“work.”
Work
�
�
Bill’s�example:
Work:�I�work�at�Stanford�and�do�some�private�consulting,�I�teach�Designing�Your
Life� workshops,� I’m� on� the� board� of� VOZ,� a� socially� responsible� start-up
(noncompensated).
Your�Play�Gauge
Play�is�about�activity�that�brings�joy�just�for�the�pure�sake�of�the�doing�of�it.�It�can�include
organized�activity�or�productive�endeavors,�but�only�if�they�are�done�for�fun�and�not�merit.
We�contend�that�all�lives�need�some�play,�and�that�making�sure�there�is�some�play�in�our�day
is�a�critical�life�design�step.�Make�a�quick�list�of�how�you�play�and�then�fill�in�your�gauge—
are�you�a�quarter�full,�or�half,�or�three-quarters,�or�really�full?
Play
�
�
Bill’s�example:
Play:�I�play�by�cooking�meals�for�friends�and�throwing�big�outdoor�parties—but
that’s�kind�of�it.
(By�the�way,�Bill�considers�this�to�be�a�red�light�on�his�dashboard.)
Your�Love�Gauge
We�do�think�that�love�makes�the�world�go�around,�and�when�we�don’t�have�any,�our�world
isn’t�as�bright�and�alive�as�it�could�be.�We�also�know�that�we�have�to�pay�attention�to�love,
and�that�it�arrives�in�a�wide�range�of�forms.�Our�primary�relationship�is�where�we�go�first
for�love,�children�typically�come�next,�and�then�it’s�a�flood�of�people�and�pets�and�community
and�anything�else�that�is�an�object�of�affection.�And�it�is�as�critical�to�feel�loved�by�others�as
it�is�to�love—it�has�to�go�both�ways.�Where�is�the�love�flowing�in�your�life,�from�you�and�from
others?�Make�a�list,�and�then�fill�in�your�gauge.
Love
�
�
Bill’s�example:
Love:�Love�shows�up�in�a�lot�of�places�in�my�life.�I�love�my�wife,�my�children,�my
parents,�my�brothers,�and�my�sister,�and�I�receive�love�back�from�all�of�them�in
their�own�ways.�I�love�great�art,�painting�especially,�and�it�moves�me�like�nothing
else.�I�love�music�in�all�its�forms—it�can�make�me�happy�and�can�make�me�cry.�I
love�the�great�spaces�in�the�world,�man-made�or�in�nature,�that�take�my�breath
away.
A� look� at� Bill’s� dashboard� highlights� the� lack� of� play� and� some� issues� with
physical�health.�These�“red�lights”�are�indicators�of�areas�that�Bill�may�need�to
attend�to.
BILL’S�DASHBOARD�with�“RED�LIGHT”�on�PLAY�and�HEALTH
So—How’s�It�Really�Going?
Knowing�the�current�status�of�your�health�/�work�play�love�dashboard�gives�you�a
framework�and�some�data�about�yourself,�all�in�one�place.�Only�you�know�what’s
good�enough�or�not�good�enough—right�now.
After�a�few�more�chapters�and�a�few�more�tools�and�ideas,�you�may�want�to
come�back�to�this�assessment�and�check�the�dashboard�one�more�time,�to�see�if
anything�has�changed.�Since�life�design�is�an�iterative�process�of�prototypes�and
experimentation,�there�are�lots�of�on�ramps�and�off�ramps�along�the�way.�If�you’re
beginning�to�think�like�a�designer,�you�will�recognize�that�life�is�never�done.�Work
is�never�done.�Play�is�never�done.�Love�and�health�are�never�done.�We�are�only
done�designing�our�lives�when�we�die.�Until�then,�we’re�involved�in�a�constant
iteration�of�the�next�big�thing:�life�as�we�know�it.�So�the�questions�remain:�Are�you
happy�right�now�with�where�your�gauges�stand�in�each�of�these�four�areas?�Have
you�looked�at�them�honestly?�Are�there�areas�that�need�action?�Have�you�perhaps
come�up�against�one�of�your�wicked�problems?�That�is�possible,�even�this�early�in
the� process.� If� you� think� you� have,� make� sure� to� check� first� for� a� “gravity
problem.”� Ask� yourself� if� your� problem� is� actionable.� Also,� look� for� some
expression�of�balance�and�proportionality�in�your�dashboard—very�important�for
design—without�imagining�that�there�is�some�perfect�symmetry�or�balance�between
all�the�areas�in�your�life.�It’s�unlikely�that�health,�work,�play,�and�love�will�divide
neatly�into�four�equal�parts.�But�when�life�is�really�out�of�balance,�there�can�be�a
problem.
Bill� noticed� that� his� play� gauge� was� way� too� low.� How’s� yours?� Is� your� play
gauge�at�a�quarter�and�your�work�at�full�or�more?�What�about�love?�What�about
your�health?�How�is�your�mental�health,�and�your�spirit?�We’re�guessing�you�are
already�starting�to�get�a�feel�for�the�areas�in�your�life�in�need�of�some�design�or
innovation.
As� you� begin� to� think� like� a� designer,� remember� one� important� thing:� it’s
impossible�to�predict�the�future.�And�the�corollary�to�that�thought�is:�once�you
design�something,�it�changes�the�future�that�is�possible.
Wrap�your�mind�around�that.
Designing�something�changes�the�future�that�is�possible.
So,�although�it�is�not�possible�to�know�your�future,�or�figure�out�a�great�life
design�before�you�begin,�at�least�you�have�a�good�idea�of�your�starting�point.�Now
it’s�time�to�get�you�pointed�in�the�right�direction�for�the�journey�ahead.�For�that,
you’ll�need�a�compass.
Try�Stuff
Health�Work�Play�/�Love�Dashboard
1. Write�a�few�sentences�about�how�it’s�going�in�each�of�the�four
areas.
2. Mark�where�you�are�(0�to�Full)�on�each�gauge.
3. Ask�yourself�if�there’s�a�design�problem�you’d�like�to�tackle�in�any
of�these�areas.
4. Now�ask�yourself�if�your�“problem”�is�a�gravity�problem.
2
Building�a�Compass
We�have�just�three�questions�for�you:
What�is�your�name?
What�is�your�quest?
What�is�the�airspeed�velocity�of�an�unladen�swallow?
If�you’re�like�most�people,�it�was�probably�easy�to�answer�two�of�those�three
questions.�We�all�know�our�names,�and�a�simple�Google�search�can�give�us�the
other�answer—twenty-four�miles�per�hour.�(For�all�of�you�hard-core�Monty�Python
fans,�that�velocity�is�for�a�European�swallow.)
So�let’s�talk�about�the�question�that’s�a�little�bit�harder—what�is�your�quest?�It’s
not�hard�to�imagine�that�if�we�added�up�all�the�hours�spent�trying�to�figure�out�life,
for�some�of�us�they�would�outweigh�the�hours�spent�actually�living�life.�Really.
Living.�Life.
We�all�know�how�to�worry�about�our�lives.�Analyze�our�lives.�Even�speculate
about�our�lives.�Worry,�analysis,�and�speculation�are�not�our�best�discovery�tools,
and�most�of�us�have,�at�one�time�or�another,�gotten�incredibly�lost�and�confused
using�them.�They�tend�to�keep�us�spinning�in�circles�and�spending�weeks,�months,
or�years�sitting�on�that�couch�(or�at�a�desk,�or�in�a�relationship)�trying�to�figure
out�what�to�do�next.�It’s�as�if�life�were�this�great�big�DIY�project,�but�only�a�select
few�actually�got�the�instruction�manual.
This�is�not�designing�your�life.
This�is�obsessing�about�your�life.
We’re�here�to�change�that.
And�the�questions�we’re�ultimately�asking�are�the�same�ones�the�Greeks�started
asking�in�the�fifth�century�b.c.�and�we’ve�all�been�asking�ever�since:�What�is�the
good�life?�How�do�you�define�it?�How�do�you�live�it?�Throughout�the�ages,�people
have�been�asking�the�same�questions:
Why�am�I�here?
What�am�I�doing?
Why�does�it�matter?
What�is�my�purpose?
What’s�the�point�of�it�all?
Life�design�is�a�way�for�you�to�figure�out�your�own�answers�to�these�perennial
questions,� and� to� figure� out� your� own� good� life.� Dave’s� answers� to� “Why� am� I
here?”�and�“What�am�I�doing?”�and�“Why�does�it�matter?”�are�going�to�be�different
from�Bill’s�answers,�and�our�answers�are�going�to�be�different�from�yours.�But�we
are�all�asking�the�same�questions.�And�we�can�all�find�answers�for�our�own�lives.
In� the� last� chapter,� you� answered� one� of� our� favorite� questions—“How’s� it
going?”—a� question� we� often� ask� in� our� office� hours.� If� you� filled� in� your� life
design�dashboard,�you�now�know�where�your�gauges�are�full,�and�where�they’re
running�on�empty,�and�knowing�what’s�on�your�life�design�dashboard�is�the�first
step�in�designing�your�life.
The�next�step�is�building�your�compass.
Building�Your�Compass
You�need�two�things�to�build�your�compass—a�Workview�and�a�Lifeview.�To�start
out,�we�need�to�discover�what�work�means�to�you.�What�is�work�for?�Why�do�you
do�it?�What�makes�good�work�good?�If�you�discover�and�are�able�to�articulate�your
philosophy�of�work�(what�it’s�for�and�why�you�do�it),�you�will�be�less�likely�to�let
others�design�your�life�for�you.�Developing�your�own�Workview�is�one�component
of�the�compass�you�are�building;�a�Lifeview�is�second.
Now,�Lifeview�may�sound�a�bit�lofty,�but�it’s�really�not—everyone�has�a�Lifeview.
You�may�not�have�articulated�it�before,�but�if�you�are�alive,�you�have�a�Lifeview.�A
Lifeview�is�simply�your�ideas�about�the�world�and�how�it�works.�What�gives�life
meaning?�What�makes�your�life�worthwhile�or�valuable?�How�does�your�life�relate
to�others�in�your�family,�your�community,�and�the�world?�What�do�money,�fame,
and�personal�accomplishment�have�to�do�with�a�satisfying�life?�How�important�are
experience,�growth,�and�fulfillment�in�your�life?
Once� you’ve� written� your� Workview� and� your� Lifeview,� and� completed� the
simple�exercise�that�follows,�you’ll�have�your�compass�and�be�on�the�path�toward�a
well-designed� life.� Don’t� worry—we� know� that� your� Workview� and� Lifeview� will
change.�It’s�obvious�that�the�Workview�and�Lifeview�you�have�as�a�teenager,�as�a
young�college�grad,�and�as�an�empty�nester�will�all�be�substantially�different.�The
point�is,�you�don’t�have�to�have�it�all�figured�out�for�the�rest�of�your�life;�you�just
have�to�create�the�compass�for�what�life�is�about�for�you�right�now.
Parker� Palmer,� a� renowned� educational� reformer� and� author� of� Let� Your� Life
Speak,� says� that� at� one� point� he� suddenly� realized� he� was� doing� a� noble� job� of
living�someone� else’s� life.� Parker�was� emulating� his� great� heroes—Martin� Luther
King,�Jr.,�Gandhi—both�great�social�justice�leaders�of�the�1950s�and�’60s.�Because
he�valued�their�sentiments�and�goals,�he�set�his�path�in�the�world�by�their�compass,
not�his�own,�and�worked�hard�to�change�the�educational�system�from�within.�He
earned�a�Ph.D.�at�UC�Berkeley�and�was�on�track�to�reach�his�goal�of�becoming�a
respected�university�president.�That�was�all�well�and�good,�but�Parker�hated�it.�He
came�to�the�realization�that�he�could�be�inspired�by�people�like�Martin�Luther
King�and�Gandhi,�but�that�didn’t�mean�he�had�to�walk�their�same�path.�He�ended
up�redesigning�his�life�as�a�thought�leader�and�writer—still�working�for�the�same
goals,�but�in�a�way�that�was�less�about�imitation�and�more�about�authenticity.
The�point�is,�there�are�lots�of�powerful�voices�in�the�world,�and�lots�of�powerful
voices�in�our�heads,�all�telling�us�what�to�do�or�who�to�be.�And�because�there�are
many�models�for�how�life�is�supposed�to�be�lived,�we�all�run�the�risk,�like�Parker,
of�accidentally�using�someone�else’s�compass�and�living�someone�else’s�life.�The
best�way�to�avoid�this�is�to�articulate�clearly�our�own�Workview�and�Lifeview,�so�we
can�build�our�own�unique�compass.
Our�goal�for�your�life�is�rather�simple:�coherency.�A�coherent�life�is�one�lived�in
such�a�way�that�you�can�clearly�connect�the�dots�between�three�things:
• Who�you�are
• What�you�believe
• What�you�are�doing
For�example,�if�in�your�Lifeview�you�believe�in�leaving�the�planet�a�better�place
for�the�next�generation,�and�you�work�for�a�giant�corporation�that�is�polluting�the
planet� (but� for� a� really� great� salary),� there� is� going� to� be� a� lack� of� coherency
between�what�you�believe�and�what�you�do—and�as�a�result�a�lot�of�disappointment
and�discontent.�Most�of�us�have�to�make�some�trade-offs�and�compromises�along
the�way,�including�some�we�may�not�like.�If�your�Lifeview�is�that�art�is�the�only
thing� worth� pursuing,� and� your� Workview� tells� you� that� it’s� critical� to� make
enough�money�so�your�kids�have�everything�they�need,�you�are�going�to�make�a
compromise�in�your�Lifeview�while�your�children�are�dependent�and�at�home.�But
that�will�be�okay,�because�it’s�a�conscious�decision,�which�allows�you�to�stay�“on
course”� and� coherent.� Living� coherently� doesn’t� mean� everything� is� in� perfect
order�all�the�time.�It�simply�means�you�are�living�in�alignment�with�your�values
and� have� not� sacrificed� your� integrity� along� the� way.� When� you� have� a� good
compass�guiding�you,�you�have�the�power�to�cut�these�kinds�of�deals�with�yourself.
If�you�can�see�the�connections�between�who�you�are,�what�you�believe,�and�what
you�are�doing,�you�will�know�when�you�are�on�course,�when�there�is�tension,�when
there�might�need�to�be�some�careful�compromises,�and�when�you�are�in�need�of�a
major� course� correction.� Our� experience� with� our� students� has� shown� that� the
ability�to�connect�these�three�dots�increases�your�sense�of�self,�and�that�helps�you
create�more�meaning�in�your�life�and�have�greater�satisfaction.
So�now�it’s�time�to�build�your�compass�and�set�out�on�your�quest.�Right�now
your�quest�is�simple�(and�it’s�not�to�find�the�Holy�Grail).�Your�quest�is�to�design
your�life.�We�may�all�want�the�same�things�in�life—a�healthy�and�long�life,�work�we
enjoy�and�that�matters,�loving�and�meaningful�relationships,�and�a�hell�of�a�lot�of
fun�along�the�way—but�how�we�think�we’ll�get�them�is�very�different.
Workview�Reflection
Write�a�short�reflection�about�your�Workview.�We’re�not�looking�for�a�term�paper
here� (and� we’re� still� not� grading� you),� but� we� do� want� you� really� to� write� this
down.�Don’t�do�it�in�your�head.�This�should�take�about�thirty�minutes.�Try�to
shoot�for�250�words—less�than�a�page�of�typed�writing.
A�Workview�should�address�the�critical�issues�related�to�what�work�is�and�what
it�means�to�you.�It�is�not�just�a�list�of�what�you�want�from�or�out�of�work,�but�a
general�statement�of�your�view�of�work.�It’s�your�definition�for�what�good�work
deserves�to�be.�A�Workview�may�address�such�questions�as:
• Why�work?
• What’s�work�for?
• What�does�work�mean?
• How�does�it�relate�to�the�individual,�others,�society?
• What�defines�good�or�worthwhile�work?
• What�does�money�have�to�do�with�it?
• What�do�experience,�growth,�and�fulfillment�have�to�do�with�it?
In�the�years�during�which�we’ve�been�helping�people�with�this�exercise,�we’ve
noticed�that�a�Workview�is�a�pretty�new�idea�for�most�people.�And�we’ve�noticed
that�when�people�get�stuck�on�this�exercise�it�is�because�they�are�just�writing�down
what� they’re� looking� for� in� a� job� or� an� employment� situation,� which� is� a� “job
description.”�For�this�exercise,�we’re�not�interested�in�what�work�you�want�to�do,
but�why�you�work.
What�we’re�after�is�your�philosophy�of�work—what�it’s�for,�what�it�means.�This
will�essentially�be�your�work�manifesto.�When�using�the�term�“work,”�we�mean�the
broadest�definition—not�just�what�you�do�to�make�money�or�for�“a�job.”�Work�is
often� the� largest� single� component� of� most� people’s� waking� lives,� and� over� a
lifetime�it�occupies�more�of�our�attention�and�energy�than�anything�else�we�do.
Accordingly,�we’re�suggesting�you�take�the�time�to�reflect�and�articulate�what�work
and�vocation�mean�to�you�(and�perhaps�what�you�hope�work�means�for�others�as
well).
Workviews� can� and� do� range� widely� in� what� they� address� and� how� they
incorporate�different�issues,�such�as�service�to�others�and�the�world,�money�and
standard�of�living,�and�growth,�learning,�skills,�and�talents.�All�of�these�can�be�part
of�the�equation.�We�want�you�to�address�what�you�think�is�important.�You�do�not
have� to� address� the� question� of� service� to� others� or� any� explicit� connection� to
social�issues.�However,�the�positive�psychologist�Martin�Seligman1�found�that�the
people�who�can�make�an�explicit�connection�between�their�work�and�something
socially�meaningful�to�them�are�more�likely�to�find�satisfaction,�and�are�better�able
to�adapt�to�the�inevitable�stresses�and�compromises�that�come�with�working�in�the
world.�Since�most�people�tell�us�they�long�for�satisfying�and�meaningful�work,�we
encourage� you� to� explore� the� questions� above� and� write� down� your� Workview.
Your�compass�won’t�be�complete�without�it.
Lifeview�Reflection
Just�as�you�did�with�the�Workview,�please�write�a�reflection�on�your�Lifeview.�This
should�also�take�no�more�than�thirty�minutes�and�be�250�words�or�so.�Below�are
some�questions�often�addressed�in�a�Lifeview,�just�to�get�you�started.�The�key�thing
is� to� write� down� whatever� critical� defining� values� and� perspectives� provide� the
basis� for� your� understanding� of� life.� Your� Lifeview� is� what� provides� your
definition� of� what� have� been� called� “matters� of� ultimate� concern.”� It’s� what
matters�most�to�you.
• Why�are�we�here?
• What�is�the�meaning�or�purpose�of�life?
• What�is�the�relationship�between�the�individual�and�others?
• Where�do�family,�country,�and�the�rest�of�the�world�fit�in?
• What�is�good,�and�what�is�evil?
• Is�there�a�higher�power,�God,�or�something�transcendent,�and�if�so,
what�impact�does�this�have�on�your�life?
• What�is�the�role�of�joy,�sorrow,�justice,�injustice,�love,�peace,�and
strife�in�life?
We� realize� that� these� are� somewhat� philosophical� questions,� and� we� did� just
mention� the� “G”� word.� Some� readers� will� see� God� as� unimportant;� others� may
have� wanted� us� to� address� this� up� front� as� the� most� important� issue.� You’ve
probably�figured�out�by�now�that�design�is�values-neutral,�and�we�don’t�take�sides.
The�questions,�including�the�ones�about�God�or�spirituality,�are�given�to�provoke
your�thinking,�and�it’s�up�to�you�to�see�which�ones�you�want�to�try�to�answer.�They
are�not�talking�points�for�religious�or�political�debates,�and�there�are�no�wrong
answers—no�wrong�Lifeviews.�The�only�way�to�do�this�incorrectly�is�not�to�do�it�at
all.�Besides�that,�be�curious�and�think�like�a�designer.�Ask�the�questions�that�work
for�you,�make�up�your�own,�and�see�what�you�discover.
Write�down�your�answers.
Ready.�Begin.
Coherency�and�Workview-Lifeview�Integration
Read�over�your�Workview�and�Lifeview,�and�write�down�a�few�thoughts�on�the
following�questions�(please�try�to�answer�each�of�the�questions):
• Where�do�your�views�on�work�and�life�complement�one�another?
• Where�do�they�clash?
• Does�one�drive�the�other?�How?
Please�take�some�time�to�write�up�your�thoughts�on�the�integration�of�your�two
views.� Our� students� tell� us� that� this� is� where� they� often� get� the� biggest� “aha”
moments,�so�please�take�this�part�of�the�exercise�seriously�and�give�the�integration
some�thought.�In�most�cases,�this�reflection�will�result�in�some�editing�of�one�or
both�of�your�views.�By�having�your�Workview�and�your�Lifeview�in�harmony�with
each�other,�you�increase�your�own�clarity�and�ability�to�live�a�consciously�coherent,
meaningful�life—one�in�which�who�you�are,�what�you�believe,�and�what�you�do�are
aligned.�When�you’ve�got�an�accurate�compass,�you’ll�never�stray�off�course�for
long.
True�North
So�now�you�have�an�articulated�and�integrated�Lifeview�and�Workview.�Ultimately,
what�these�two�views�do�is�give�you�your�“True�North.”�They�create�your�compass.
They�will�help�you�know�if�you’re�on�course�or�off�course.�At�any�moment�you�can
assess� where� you� are� in� relation� to� your� True� North.� It’s� rare� that� people� sail
beautifully�straight�through�their�beautiful�lives,�always�looking�beautiful.�In�fact,
as�all�sailors�know,�you�can’t�chart�a�course�of�one�straight�line—you�tack�according
to�what�the�winds�and�the�conditions�allow.�Heading�True�North,�you�may�sail
one�way,�then�another�direction,�and�then�back�the�other�way.�Sometimes�you�sail
close� to� the� shoreline� to� avoid� rough� seas,� adapting� as� needed.� And� sometimes
storms�hit�and�you�get�completely�lost,�or�the�entire�sailboat�tips�over.
These�are�the�times�when�it’s�best�to�have�your�Workview�and�your�Lifeview
handy�to�reorient�yourself.�Anytime�you�start�to�feel�your�life�is�not�working,�or
you’re�going�through�a�major�transition,�it’s�good�to�do�a�compass�calibration.�We
do�them�at�least�once�a�year.
Rotate�your�tires.
Change�the�battery�in�your�smoke�detector.
Double-check�your�Workview�and�Lifeview�and�make�sure�they�align.
Anytime�you’re�changing�your�situation,�or�pursuing�a�new�thing,�or�wondering
what�you’re�doing�at�a�particular�job—stop.�Before�you�start,�it’s�a�good�idea�to
check� your� compass� and� orient� yourself.� Now� that� you� have� your� compass,� it’s
time�to�“find�your�way.”
This�is�a�quest,�after�all.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�I�should�know�where�I’m�going!
Reframe:�I�won’t�always�know�where�I’m�going—but�I�can�always�know
whether�I’m�going�in�the�right�direction.
Try�Stuff
Workview�and�Lifeview
1. Write�a�short�reflection�about�your�Workview.�This�should�take
about�thirty�minutes.�Shoot�for�about�250�words—less�than�a
page�of�typed�writing.
2. Write�a�short�reflection�about�your�Lifeview.�This�should�also�take
no�more�than�thirty�minutes�and�be�250�words�or�so.
3. Read�over�your�Lifeview�and�Workview,�and�answer�each�of�these
questions:
a.�Where�do�your�views�on�work�and�life�complement�one
another?
b.�Where�do�they�clash?
c.�Does�one�drive�the�other?�How?
3
Wayfinding
Michael� was� happy.� A� popular� boy� living� in� a� small� college� town� in� central
California,� he� played� sports,� hung� out� with� his� friends,� and� enjoyed� the� fairly
carefree�life�that�comes�with�being�a�popular�boy�who�plays�sports�and�hangs�out
with� his� friends.� Michael� didn’t� spend� a� whole� lot� of� time� thinking� about� or
planning�for�the�future.�He�just�did�whatever�was�in�front�of�him,�and�life�seemed
to�work�out�fine.�His�mother,�however,�had�plans.�Lots�of�plans.�She�planned�for
Michael�to�go�to�college,�chose�where�he�would�apply,�and�even�chose�what�he
would�major�in.�This�resulted�in�Michael’s�attending�Cal�Poly�in�San�Luis�Obispo
and�majoring�in�civil�engineering.�Michael�wasn’t�particularly�invested�in�being�a
civil�engineer;�he�was�simply�following�Mom’s�plan.
He�did�fine�in�his�major�and�graduated�from�college.�Michael�then�fell�in�love
with� Skylar,� who�was� finishing� her� degree� and�moving� to� Amsterdam�to� take� a
corporate�consulting�job.�Michael�followed�Skylar�and�took�a�perfectly�good�civil-
engineering�position�in�Amsterdam,�where�he�did�a�decent�job.�Michael�was�again
happily� following� a� path� in� life� that� had� been� chosen� for� him,� and� not� once
having�stopped�to�consider�what�he�wanted�to�do�or�who�he�wanted�to�become.�He
had�never�articulated�his�Lifeview�or�Workview,�and�had�always�let�other�people
steer�his�course�and�determine�his�direction.�It�had�worked�well�enough�so�far.
After� Amsterdam,� Michael� traveled� back� to� California� with� Skylar� (now� his
wife),� who� found� a� great� job� she� loved;� Michael� took� a� job� in� a� nearby� civil-
engineering� firm.� That’s� when� the� trouble� began.� He� was� doing� all� the� things
respectable� civil� engineers� do—but� he� was� bored,� restless,� and� miserable.� His
newfound�misery�left�him�confused.�He�had�no�idea�where�to�go�or�what�to�do.
For�the�first�time�in�his�life,�his�plan�wasn’t�working,�and,�without�a�direction,
Michael�felt�absolutely�lost.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�Work�is�not�supposed�to�be�enjoyable;�that’s�why�they
call�it�work.
Reframe:�Enjoyment�is�a�guide�to�finding�the�right�work�for�you.
Lots�of�people�had�advice�for�Michael.�A�few�friends�suggested�he�start�his�own
civil-engineering�practice,�believing�that�his�problem�was�due�to�his�working�for
someone�else.�His�father-in-law�told�him,�“You’re�a�smart�guy.�You’re�an�engineer,
so�you�know�your�math.�You�should�be�in�finance.�You�should�be�a�stockbroker.”
Michael�thought�about�all�the�many�suggestions�and�started�calculating�how�he
could�quit�his�job�and�go�back�to�school�to�study�finance,�or�maybe�go�to�business
school.�He�considered�all�of�these�options�because,�frankly,�he�wasn’t�sure�what�the
problem�was.�Had�he�failed�as�a�civil�engineer?�Had�civil�engineering�failed�him?
Was�he�just�supposed�to�put�up�with�it?�After�all,�it�was�only�a�job,�right?
Wrong.
Finding�Your�Way
Wayfinding�is�the�ancient�art�of�figuring�out�where�you�are�going�when�you�don’t
actually�know�your�destination.�For�wayfinding,�you�need�a�compass�and�you�need
a�direction.�Not�a�map—a�direction.�Think�of�the�American�explorers�Lewis�and
Clark.�They�didn’t�have�a�map�when�Jefferson�sent�them�out�to�travel�through�the
land�acquired�in�the�Louisiana�Purchase�and�make�their�way�to�the�Pacific.�While
wayfinding� to� the� ocean,� they� mapped� the� route� (140� maps,� to� be� exact).
Wayfinding�your�life�is�similar.�Since�there’s�no�one�destination�in�life,�you�can’t
put�your�goal�into�your�GPS�and�get�the�turn-by-turn�directions�for�how�to�get
there.�What�you�can�do�is�pay�attention�to�the�clues�in�front�of�you,�and�make
your�best�way�forward�with�the�tools�you�have�at�hand.�We�think�the�first�clues�are
engagement�and�energy.
Engagement
Civil�engineering�hadn’t�failed�Michael.�He�just�wasn’t�paying�attention�to�his�life,
and� all� he� knew� was� that� something� wasn’t� working.� At� thirty-four� years� old,
Michael�didn’t�know�what�he�liked�and�what�he�didn’t�like.�When�he�came�to�us
for�help,�he�was�on�the�verge�of�upending�his�life�and�career�completely,�and�for
no� good� reasons.� We� had� him� spend� a� few� weeks� doing� a� simple� logging
assignment�at�the�end�of�every�workday.�Michael�wrote�down�when�during�the�day
he�had�been�feeling�bored,�restless,�or�unhappy�at�his�job,�and�what�exactly�he�had
been�doing�during�those�times�(the�times�when�he�was�disengaged).�He�also�wrote
down�when�he�was�excited,�focused,�and�having�a�good�time�at�work,�and�what
exactly�he�was�doing�during�those�times�(the�times�when�he�was�engaged).�Michael
was�working�on�what�we�call�the�Good�Time�Journal.
Why�did�we�have�Michael�do�this�(and,�yes,�we’re�going�to�ask�you�to�do�it,�too)?
Because�we�were�trying�to�get�him�to�catch�himself�in�the�act�of�having�a�good
time.�When�you�learn�what�activities�reliably�engage�you,�you’re�discovering�and
articulating� something� that� can� be� very� helpful� in� your� life� design� work.
Remember�that�designers�have�a�bias�to�action—which�is�just�another�way�of�saying
that� we� pay� a� lot� of� attention� to� doing� things,� and� not� just� to� thinking� about
things.�Logging�when�you�are�and�aren’t�engaged�and�energized�will�help�you�pay
attention�to�what�you’re�doing�and�discover�what’s�working.
Flow:�Total�Engagement
Flow�is�engagement�on�steroids.�Flow�is�that�state�of�being�in�which�time�stands
still,� you’re� totally� engaged� in� an� activity,� and� the� challenge� of� that� particular
activity�matches�up�with�your�skill—so�you’re�neither�bored�because�it’s�too�easy
nor� anxious� because� it’s� too� hard.� People� describe� this� state� of� engagement� as
“euphoric,”� “in� the� zone,”� and� “freakin’� awesome.”� Flow� was� “discovered”� by
Professor�Mihaly�Csikszentmihalyi,�who� has�been�researching�this� phenomenon
since� the� 1970s.� When� he� first� described� the� state� of� flow,� he� had� studied� the
detailed�activities�of�thousands�of�people�going�about�their�daily�lives�and�was�able
to�isolate�this�very�special�form�of�intense�engagement.1
People�in�flow�report�the�experience�as�having�these�sorts�of�attributes:
• Experiencing�complete�involvement�in�the�activity.
• Feeling�a�sense�of�ecstasy�or�euphoria.
• Having�great�inner�clarity—knowing�just�what�to�do�and�how�to�do
it.
• Being�totally�calm�and�at�peace.
• Feeling�as�if�time�were�standing�still—or�disappearing�in�an�instant.
Flow�can�happen�during�almost�any�physical�or�mental�activity,�and�often�when
both� are� combined.� Dave� goes� into� flow� while� editing� minute� details� in� a� class
lesson�plan,�or�out�on�his�sailboat,�trimming�the�sails�as�it�heels�into�a�rising�wind.
Bill�admits�to�being�a�flow�junkie�and�finds�advising�students,�sketching�in�his�idea
log,�or�chopping�an�onion�with�his�favorite�knife�to�be�moments�most�conducive
to�flow.�Flow�is�one�of�those�“hard�to�describe�but�you�know�it�when�you�feel�it”
qualitative� experiences� that� you’ll� have� to� identify� for� yourself.� As� the� ultimate
state�of�personal�engagement,�flow�experiences�have�a�special�place�in�designing
your� life,� so� it’s� important� to� get� good� at� capturing� them� in� your� Good� Time
Journal.
Flow�is�play�for�grown-ups.�In�the�life�design�dashboard,�we�assessed�our�health,
work,�play,�and�love.�The�element�we�all�find�the�most�elusive�in�our�busy�modern
lives�is�“play.”�You�might�think�that�we�all�have�too�many�responsibilities�to�have
much�time�for�play.�Sure,�we�can�strive�to�have�our�work�and�our�chores�engage
skills�we�like�using,�but�face�it—it’s�work,�not�play.�Maybe.�Maybe�not.�Flow�is�one
key�to�what�we�call�adult�play,�and�a�really�rewarding�and�satisfying�career�involves
a�lot�of�flow�states.�The�essence�of�play�is�being�fully�immersed�and�joyful�in�what
you’re�doing,�without�being�constantly�distracted�by�concerns�about�the�outcomes.
When�we’re�in�flow,�that’s�exactly�what’s�going�on—we�are�fully�present�to�what
we’re�doing,�so�present�we�don’t�even�notice�time.�Seen�this�way,�flow�is�something
we� should� strive� to� make� a� regular� part� of� our� work� life� (and� home� life,� and
exercise�life,�and�love�life…you�get�the�idea).
Energy
After� engagement,� the� second� wayfinding� clue� to� look� for� is� energy.� Human
beings,�like�all�living�things,�need�energy�to�live�and�to�thrive.�Men�and�women
used�to�spend�most�of�their�daily�energy�on�physical�tasks.�For�most�of�human
history,�men�and�women�were�working�at�hunting�and�gathering,�raising�children,
and� raising� crops,� most� of� their� time� consumed� with� energy-intensive� physical
labor.
Nowadays,�many�of�us�are�knowledge�workers,�and�we�use�our�brains�to�do�the
heavy� lifting.� The� brain� is� a� very� energy-hungry� organ.� Of� the� roughly� two
thousand� calories� we� consume� a� day,� five� hundred� go� to� running� our� brains.
That’s�astonishing:�the�brain�represents�only�about�2�percent�of�our�body�weight,
and�yet�it�takes�up�25�percent�of�the�energy�we�consume�every�day.�It’s�no�wonder
that�the�way�we�invest�our�attention�is�critical�to�whether�or�not�we�feel�high�or�low
energy.2
We�engage�in�physical�and�mental�activities�all�day�long.�Some�activities�sustain
our�energy�and�some�drain�it;�we�want�to�track�those�energy�flows�as�part�of�our
Good�Time�Journal�exercise.�Once�you�have�a�good�handle�on�where�your�energy
goes�every�week,�you�can�start�redesigning�your�activities�to�maximize�your�vitality.
Remember,�life�design�is�about�getting�more�out�of�your�current�life—and�not�only
about�redesigning�a�whole�new�life.�Even�if�questions�about�some�big�change�in
your�life�may�be�what�brought�you�to�this�book,�most�life�design�work�is�directed
at� tuning� up� and� improving� the� life� you’re� in,� without� having� to� make� huge
structural�changes�like�changing�jobs�or�moving�or�going�back�to�grad�school.
You�may�be�wondering,�“Isn’t�tracking�my�energy�level�kind�of�the�same�thing
as�tracking�how�engaged�I�am?”�Yes�and�no.�Yes,�high�levels�of�engagement�often
coincide�with�high�levels�of�energy,�but�not�necessarily.�A�colleague�of�Dave’s,�a
brilliantly�fast-thinking�computer�engineer,�found�arguing�for�his�point�of�view�an
engaging�activity,�because�it�made�him�think�on�his�feet.�He�was�great�at�it,�and
often�found�other�people�at�work�asking�him�to�make�their�arguments�for�them.
But�he�noticed�that�getting�into�those�arguments�totally�exhausted�him,�even�when
he�“won.”�He�was�not�a�contentious�person,�and�though�it�seemed�fun�at�the�time
to�outwit�others,�he�always�felt�terrible�when�it�was�over.�Energy�is�also�unique�in
that�it�can�go�negative—some�activities�can�actually�suck�the�life�right�out�of�us�and
send�us�drained�into�whatever�comes�next.�Boredom�is�a�big�energy-suck,�but�it’s
much� easier� to� recover� from� boredom� than� from� being� de-energized,� so� it’s
important�to�pay�specific�attention�to�your�energy�levels.
It’s�About�Joy
After�working�on�his�Good�Time�Journal�and�paying�attention�to�when�he�was
engaged,�when�he�was�in�flow,�and�what�was�energizing�for�him,�Michael�realized
that� he� loved� his� job� as� a� civil� engineer� when� he� was� working� on� difficult� and
complex� engineering� problems.� The� times� that� drained� him� and� made� him
miserable�were�those�when�he�was�dealing�with�difficult�personalities,�struggling�to
communicate� with� others,� and� performing� other� administrative� tasks� and
distractions�that�had�nothing�to�do�with�the�intricate�task�of�engineering.
The�end�result�was�that,�for�the�first�time�in�his�life,�Michael�was�paying�detailed
attention� to� what� really� worked� for� him.� The� results� were� amazing.� By� simply
discovering�when�he�was�enjoying�himself�at�work�and�what�caused�his�energies�to
rise�and�fall,�Michael�discovered�that�he�actually�enjoyed�civil�engineering.�It�was
the�people�stuff,�the�proposal�writing,�and�the�fee�negotiations�that�he�hated.�He
just�had�to�find�a�way�to�craft�his�job�so�that�he�was�doing�more�of�what�he�loved
and�less�of�what�he�hated.�Instead�of�business�school�(which�would�probably�have
been�a�disaster,�and�an�expensive�one�at�that),�Michael�decided�to�double�down�on
engineering.�He�ended�up�entering�a�Ph.D.�program�and�is�now�a�high-level�civil
and�structural�engineer,�who�spends�his�time,�mostly�alone,�working�on�the�kind
of�complex�engineering�problems�that�make�him�really�happy.�And�he’s�become�so
technically�valuable�that�no�one�asks�him�to�do�the�administrative�stuff�anymore.
On�good�days,�he�goes�home�with�more�energy�than�when�he�left�for�work�in�the
morning.�And�that’s�a�pretty�great�way�to�work.
Here’s� another� key� element� when� you’re� wayfinding� in� life:� follow� the� joy;
follow�what�engages�and�excites�you,�what�brings�you�alive.�Most�people�are�taught
that�work�is�always�hard�and�that�we�have�to�suffer�through�it.�Well,�there�are�parts
of�any�job�or�any�career�that�are�hard�and�annoying—but�if�most�of�what�you�do�at
work�is�not�bringing�you�alive,�then�it’s�killing�you.�It’s�your�career,�after�all,�and
you�are�going�to�be�spending�a�lot�of�time�doing�it—we�calculate�it�at�90,000�to
125,000�hours�during�the�course�of�your�lifetime.�If�it’s�not�fun,�a�lot�of�your�life�is
going�to�suck.
Now,� what� makes� work� fun?� It’s� not� what� you� might� think.� It’s� not� one
unending�office�party.�It’s�not�getting�paid�a�lot�of�money.�It’s�not�having�multiple
weeks� of� paid� vacations.� Work� is� fun� when� you� are� actually� leaning� into� your
strengths�and�are�deeply�engaged�and�energized�by�what�you’re�doing.
What�About�Purpose?
At�about�this�stage,�we’re�often�asked,�“Well,�this�is�all�great,�but�where�do�purpose
and� mission� come� into� it?� There’s� more� to� life� than� just� being� engaged� and
energized.�I�want�to�be�doing�work�I�care�about,�work�that’s�important�to�me�and
that�matters.”
We�couldn’t�agree�more.�That’s�why�we�addressed�building�your�compass�(your
well-integrated�Workview�and�Lifeview)�in�chapter�2.�As�we�suggested,�it’s�crucial
for�you�to�assess�how�well�your�work�fits�your�values�and�priorities—how�coherent
your�work�is�with�who�you�are�and�what�you�believe.�We�are�not�suggesting�a�life
singularly�focused�on�engagement�and�energy�level.�We�are�suggesting�that�focused
attention� on� engagement� and� energy� level� can� provide� very� helpful� clues� to
wayfinding�your�path�forward.�Life�design�consists�of�a�whole�set�of�ideas�and�tools
that�work�together�flexibly.�We’ll�give�you�lots�of�suggestions,�but�in�the�end�you’ll
decide�which�things�to�focus�on�and�how�to�organize�your�life�design�project.�Now
let’s�get�started�on�your�Good�Time�Journal.
Good�Time�Journal�Exercise
We’re�going�to�ask�you�to�do�a�Good�Time�Journal,�as�Michael�did.�Just�how�you
build� yours� is� up� to� you.� You� can� make� your� entries� all� by� hand� in� a� bound
journal,� or� use� a� three-ring� binder� with� loose� sheets,� or� even� do� it� on� your
computer�(though�we�strongly�recommend�you�try�it�by�hand,�so�you�can�sketch�in
your�journal�or�binder).�The�most�important�thing�is�that�you�actually�do�it�and
regularly� make� entries;� whatever� format� you� will� most� enjoy� and� will� use� most
often�is�the�way�to�go.
There�are�two�elements�to�the�Good�Time�Journal:
• Activity�Log�(where�I�record�where�I’m�engaged�and�energized)
• Reflections�(where�I�discover�what�I�am�learning)
The�Activity�Log�simply�lists�your�primary�activities�and�how�engaged�
�and
energized�
�you�were�by�those�activities.�We�recommend�that�you�make�Activity
Log�entries�daily,�to�be�sure�to�capture�lots�of�good�information.�If�every�few�days
is�easier,�that’s�fine�as�well,�but�log�activities�at�least�twice�a�week�or�you’ll�miss�too
much.�If�you’re�using�a�binder,�you�can�make�log�sheets�using�the�worksheet�at�the
end�of�this�chapter,�which�has�little�gauges�for�how�engaged�
�and�energized�
you�are�by�your�activities�(or�download�it�at�www.designingyour.life).�You�can�also
just�draw�gauges�(or�whatever�engagement�and�energy�symbols�you�like)�into�your
journal�book.�Do�what�works�for�you—just�get�the�information�down�on�paper.
All�of�us�are�motivated�by�different�kinds�of�work�activities.�Your�job�is�to�figure
out�which�ones�motivate�you—with�as�much�specificity�as�you�can.�It�will�take�a
while�to�get�the�hang�of�this,�because,�if�you’re�like�most�people,�you’ve�not�been
paying�detailed�attention�to�this�sort�of�thing.�Sure,�there�are�times�when�we�all
come�home�at�the�end�of�the�day�and�say,�“That�was�great,”�or�“That�sucked,”�but�we
seldom�sift�through�the�particulars�of�what�contributed�to�those�experiences.�A�day
is�made�up�of�many�moments,�some�of�which�are�great,�some�of�which�suck,�and
most� of� which� lie� somewhere� in� between.� Your� job� is� to� drill� down� into� the
particulars�of�your�day�and�catch�yourself�in�the�act�of�having�a�good�time.
The�second�element�of�the�Good�Time�Journal�is�reflection,�looking�over�your
Activity� Log� and� noticing� trends,� insights,� surprises—anything� that� is� a� clue� to
what�does�and�doesn’t�work�for�you.�We�recommend�doing�your�Activity�Log�for
at�least�three�weeks,�or�whatever�period�of�time�you�need�to�be�sure�you�capture�all
the�various�kinds�of�activities�that�arise�in�your�current�situation�(some�activities
may�only�come�around�every�few�weeks).�Then�we�recommend�that�you�do�your
Good�Time�Journal�reflection�weekly,�so�your�reflections�are�based�on�more�than
just�a�single�experience�of�each�activity.
Write�your�weekly�reflections�on�blank�pages�in�your�Good�Time�Journal.
We’ve�included�a�page�from�one�of�Bill’s�recent�Good�Time�Journal�Activity
Logs.
Bill’s�reflection�included�these�observations:
He�noticed�that�his�drawing�class�and�office�hours�reliably�created�flow�states,
and�that�teaching�and�“date�night”�were�the�activities�that�returned�significantly
more�energy�than�they�consumed.�Doubling�up�on�those�activities�would�certainly
be�one�way�to�energize�his�week.�His�weekly�faculty�meeting�is�sometimes�full�of
interesting�conversations�and�sometimes�not,�so�he�drew�two�arrows�on�his�energy
diagram.�He�was�not�surprised�that�budget�meetings�sucked�energy�out�of�his�day—
he’s�never�liked�the�fiscal�side�of�things�much�(though�he�appreciates�that�they’re
crucial).
Bill�adjusted�his�schedule�to�surround�these�less�engaging�activities�with�more
engaging�activities,�and�to�give�himself�small�rewards�when�he�completes�“energy-
negative”�tasks.�The�best�way�to�deal�with�these�energy-negative�activities�is�to�make
sure� that� you� are� well� rested� and� have� the� energy� reserves� needed� to� “do� them
right.”�Otherwise,�you�might�find�yourself�doing�them�again—costing�you�more
energy�than�they�should.
Bill� was� surprised� that� coaching� master’s� students,� the� students� he� likes� and
spends�the�most�time�with,�was�such�a�drain�on�his�week.�After�journaling�a�bit�on
that� subject,� he� discovered� two� things:� (1)� he� was� trying� to� coach� in� a� bad
environment�(the�noisy�graduate�studio)�and�(2)�his�coaching�interaction�wasn’t
effective—his� students� weren’t� “getting� it.”� Those� two� observations� resulted� in� a
redesign� of� his� Tuesday-night� class� environment� (he� changed� classrooms)� and� a
shift� in� the� coaching� structure� from� meeting� one� to� one� with� each� student� to
coaching� in� small� groups,� so� students� could� help� one� another� during� the
interactions.�These�changes�worked�so�well�that�a�few�weeks�later�he�was�regularly
going�into�flow�during�coaching�sessions.�The�budgeting�still�sucked,�of�course,
but�it’s�not�that�big�a�part�of�the�job,�and�the�new�coaching�flow�moments�help
make�it�more�bearable.
Bill� was� using� his� Good� Time� Journal� primarily� to� improve� his� current� life
design.� Michael� did� the� exercise� in� search� of� what� strategic� career� path� to� take.
They�had�very�different�goals�and�got�very�different�results,�but�both�used�exactly
the�same�technique—paying�detailed�attention�to�what�was�engaging�and�energizing
them.
Zooming�In—Getting�to�the�Good�Stuff
After�a�week�or�two,�when�you’ve�got�a�decent�body�of�entries�in�your�Good�Time
Journal�and�you’re�starting�to�notice�some�interesting�things,�it’s�time�to�zoom�in
and�take�the�exercise�to�the�next�level.�Typically,�after�you�start�to�get�the�hang�of
paying� more� detailed� attention� to� your� days,� you� notice� that� some� of� your� log
entries�could�be�more�specific:�you�need�to�zoom�in�to�see�more�clearly.�The�idea�is
to�try�to�become�as�precise�as�possible;�the�clearer�you�are�on�what�is�and�isn’t
working�for�you,�the�better�you�can�set�your�wayfinding�direction.�For�instance…
What�you�initially�logged�as�“Staff�Mtg—Enjoyed�it�for�once�today!”�might,�after
you’ve� looked� at� it� again,� be� more� accurately� restated� as� “Staff� Mtg—Felt� great
when�I�rephrased�what�Jon�said�and�everyone�went�‘Ooooh—exactly!’ ”�This�more
precise� version� tells� a� much� more� useful� story� about� what� specific� activity� or
behavior� engages� you.� And� it� opens� the� door� to� developing� even� greater� self-
awareness.�When�your�entries�have�that�kind�of�detail�in�them,�your�reflections�can
be�more�insightful.�When�journaling�your�reflection�on�the�log�entry�about�that
staff�meeting,�you�might�ask�yourself,�“Was�I�more�engaged�by�artfully�rephrasing
Jon’s� comment� (getting� the� articulation� dialed� in� just� right)� or� by� facilitating
consensus�among�the�staff�(being�the�guy�who�made�the�group’s�‘Now�we�get�it!’
unifying�moment�happen)?”�If�you�conclude�that�artful�articulation�was�the�real
sweet�spot�of�that�staff�meeting�moment�for�you,�that�important�insight�can�help
you�be�on�the�lookout�for�content-creation�opportunities�over�group�facilitation
opportunities.� Take� this� sort� of� observation� and� reflection� as� far� as� you� find
helpful�(and�no�further—you�don’t�want�to�get�stuck�in�your�journal).
AEIOU
Getting�great�insights�out�of�your�Good�Time�Journal�reflections�isn’t�always�easy,
so�here’s�a�tool�designers�use�to�make�detailed�and�accurate�observations—part�of
getting�good�at�the�curiosity�mind-set.�It’s�the�AEIOU�method3�that�provides�you
five�sets�of�questions�you�can�use�when�reflecting�on�your�Activity�Log.
Activities.�What�were�you�actually�doing?�Was�this�a�structured�or�an�unstructured
activity?� Did� you� have� a� specific� role� to� play� (team� leader)� or� were� you� just� a
participant�(at�the�meeting)?
Environments.�Our�environment�has�a�profound�effect�on�our�emotional�state.�You
feel�one�way�at�a�football�stadium,�another�in�a�cathedral.�Notice�where�you�were
when�you�were�involved�in�the�activity.�What�kind�of�a�place�was�it,�and�how�did�it
make�you�feel?
Interactions.� What� were� you� interacting� with—people� or� machines?� Was� it� a� new
kind�of�interaction�or�one�you�are�familiar�with?�Was�it�formal�or�informal?
Objects.�Were�you�interacting�with�any�objects�or�devices—iPads�or�smartphones,
hockey�sticks�or�sailboats?�What�were�the�objects�that�created�or�supported�your
feeling�engaged?
Users.� Who� else� was� there,� and� what� role� did� they� play� in� making� it� either� a
positive�or�a�negative�experience?
Using� AEIOU� can� really� help� you� to� zoom� in� effectively� and� discover
specifically�what�it�is�that�is�or�isn’t�working�for�you.�Here�are�two�examples:
Lydia�is�a�contract�writer.�She�works�to�help�experts�document�their
procedures�in�manuals.�And�she’d�come�to�conclude�that�she�hated
working� with� people—mostly� because� of� how� awful� she� felt� after
going�to�meetings,�and�how�great�she�felt�when�she�got�to�write�all
day.�She�was�wondering�how�she�could�make�a�living�without�ever
going�to�a�meeting�again�when�she�did�the�Good�Time�Journal�and
used�the�AEIOU�method.�When�she�zoomed�in,�she�observed�that
she�actually�liked�people�fine—when�she�got�to�meet�with�only�one�or
two� of� them� and� either� work� hard� on� the� writing� or� do� rapid
brainstorming� on� new� project� ideas� (activity).� She� hated� meetings
about� planning,� schedules,� and� business� strategy� and� any� meeting
with� more� than� six� people� in� it;� she� just� couldn’t� track� all� the
different�points�of�view�(environment).�She�realized�that�she�was�just
an�intense�and�focused�worker,�and�that�her�intensity�could�be�either
nurtured� or� frustrated� by� other� people� (users),� depending� on� the
form�of�collaboration�(interactions).
Basra�simply�loved�higher�education.�It�didn’t�matter�what�she�was
doing—if�she�was�doing�it�on�a�university�campus,�she�was�a�happy
camper�(environment).�So�she�went�to�work�at�the�university�where
she�had�done�her�undergraduate�degree.�For�five�or�six�years,�she�was
very�happy�doing�anything�and�everything�from�fund-raising�to�new
student�orientation�(activity).�Then�it�all�began�to�fade,�and�she�was
nervous� that� her� love� affair� with� education� was� over.� She� did� a
version�of�the�Good�Time�Journal�and�realized�that�she�still�loved�the
university,�but�had�gotten�into�the�wrong�job.�As�she�approached�her
thirties,� environment� alone� was� not� enough;� role� mattered� now.
She’d�accepted�a�promotion�that�transferred�her�from�student�affairs
—and�lots�of�interesting�student�interactions—to�legal�affairs—and�lots
of�meetings�with�administrators�and�lawyers�(users),�and�paperwork
(objects).�She�figured�it�out�and�took�a�slight�demotion�to�accept�a
position� in� the� housing� office,� where� she� once� again� could� have
interactions�of�a�more�constructive�nature�and�less�paperwork.
As� you� work� on� your� reflections� in� the� Good� Time� Journal,� try� using� this
AEIOU�method�to�get�more�out�of�your�observations.�It�is�important�to�record
whatever�comes�up�and�not�to�judge�yourself—there�are�no�right�or�wrong�feelings
about�your�experience.�The�thing�to�focus�on�is�that�this�kind�of�information�is
going�to�be�incredibly�helpful�in�designing�your�life.
Mining�the�Mountaintop
Your�past�is�waiting�to�be�mined�for�insights,�too—especially�your�mountaintop
moments,�or�“peak�experiences.”�Peak�experiences�in�our�past—even�our�long-ago
past—can� be� telling.� Take� some� time� to� reflect� on� your� memories� of� past� peak
work-related�experiences�and�do�a�Good�Time�Journal�Activity�Log�and�reflection
on� them� to� see� what� you� find.� Those� memories� have� stuck� with� you� for� good
reason.� You� can� make� a� list� of� those� peak� experiences,� or� write� them� out� as� a
narrative�or�story.�It�can�be�very�enjoyable�to�set�to�words�the�story�of�that�great
time� when� you� were� on� the� team� that� planned� what� they’re� still� calling� the
Ultimate�Sales�Meeting,�or�when�you�wrote�the�procedure�manual�that�they�still
pass�out�to�new�writers�as�the�standard�for�doing�it�right.�Having�the�narrative�of
your�peak�experiences�written�down�will�make�it�easier�to�extract�from�those�stories
the�activities�that�most�engaged�and�energized�you,�and�to�discover�insights�that
you�can�apply�today.
Using�past�experience�is�particularly�useful�if�you�aren’t�currently�in�a�situation
that� lends� itself� to� a� successful� Good� Time� Journal� exercise,� such� as� if� you’re
between�jobs.�It’s�also�helpful�if�you’re�just�getting�started�on�your�professional�life
and�don’t�yet�have�much�experience.�If�so,�think�about�activities�that�you�did�in
other� areas� of� your� life� (perhaps� even� decades� ago)� when� you� felt� that� life� was
working.�A�historical�Good�Time�Journal�on�past�projects�from�school,�summer
programs,�volunteer�projects—anything�that�you�were�seriously�engaged�by—can�be
useful.�When�looking�back,�do�beware�of�revisionist�history—being�too�kind�to�the
good�days�or�too�critical�of�the�bad�times.�Just�try�to�be�honest.
Enjoy�the�Journey
This�new�way�of�noticing�will�help�guide�you�in�finding�what’s�next�for�you.�Like
Lewis� and� Clark,� you� are� starting� to� map� some� of� the� territory� you’ve� already
covered,�and�are�starting�to�see�new�possibilities�in�the�territory�ahead.�You�are
moving�from�one�level�of�awareness�to�another,�really�exploring�how�things�make
you� (not� your� mom,� dad,� boss,� or� spouse)� feel.� You� have� started� to� wayfind—
moving�from�where�you�are�to�the�next�possible�place.�Armed�with�your�compass
and�your�Good�Time�Journal�insights,�you�can�do�a�great�job�of�wayfinding.
Michael�found�his�way.
Lewis�and�Clark�found�their�way.
You�can�find�your�way�as�well.
The�next�step�is�to�generate�as�many�options�as�possible,�so�you�have�lots�to
experiment�with�and�prototype.
For�that,�we’re�going�to�need�to�do�a�little�mind�mapping.
Try�Stuff
Good�Time�Journal
1. Complete�a�log�of�your�daily�activities,�using�the�worksheet
provided�(or�in�your�own�notebook).�Note�when�you�are�engaged
and/or�energized�and�what�you�are�doing�during�those�times.�Try
to�do�this�daily,�or�at�the�very�least�every�few�days.
2. Continue�this�daily�logging�for�three�weeks.
3. At�the�end�of�each�week,�jot�down�your�reflections—notice�which
activities�are�engaging�and�energizing,�and�which�ones�are�not.
4. Are�there�any�surprises�in�your�reflections?
5. Zoom�in�and�try�to�get�even�more�specific�about�what�does�or
does�not�engage�and�energize�you.
6. Use�the�AEIOU�method�as�needed�to�help�you�in�your�reflections.
4
Getting�Unstuck
Grant�was�stuck.�He�worked�for�a�major�car-rental�company,�and�after�doing�his
Good� Time� Journal,� he� realized� he� was� spending� the� majority� of� his� days� in
activities� that� neither� engaged� nor� energized� him.� He� hated� dealing� with� irate
customers.� He� didn’t� like� completing� endless� boilerplate� contracts.� He� hated
reciting�the�same�exact�script�every�day.�He�didn’t�like�having�to�up-sell�customers
constantly.�But�most�of�all�he�hated�feeling�as�if�he�didn’t�matter.�He�didn’t�want
to� be� a� small,� unimportant� cog� in� a� giant� corporate� machine.� Grant� wanted� to
work�someplace�where�he�could�leave�his�mark.�He�wanted�to�have�influence.�He
wanted�what�he�did�to�be�important�to�someone.�Anyone.
Grant� didn’t� completely� hate� his� job,� but� he� couldn’t� think� of� a� single� time
when�he�had�ever�experienced�anything�close�to�a�state�of�flow.�Work�equaled�a
kind�of�dull�misery.�He�watched�the�clock.�He�waited�for�his�paycheck�each�week.
And�the�weekends�couldn’t�come�soon�enough�or�last�long�enough.�The�only�time
he� liked� what� he� was� doing� was� when� he� was� hiking� among� the� redwoods,� or
playing�a�pickup�basketball�game�with�his�friends,�or�helping�his�niece�and�nephew
with�their�homework.
None�of�which�would�pay�the�bills.
Grant�was�about�to�be�promoted�to�store�manager,�and�this�made�him�feel�more
stuck�than�ever.�He�had�never�dreamed�of�working�for�a�car-rental�agency,�but,�no
matter� how� long� and� hard� he� thought� about� it,� he� couldn’t� come� up� with� a
realistic�idea�for�a�different�career.�He�had�no�idea�where�to�begin,�even.�Sure,�he
would�love�to�be�a�rock�star,�or�a�major-league�baseball�player.�But�he�didn’t�sing
or�play�an�instrument,�and�he�had�bailed�out�of�Little�League�at�the�age�of�twelve.
A� literature� major� in� college,� he� had� taken� the� first� job� that� paid� more� than
minimum�wage.�And�now�he�was�trapped.�Grant�didn’t�want�to�resign�himself�to
renting�cars�for�the�rest�of�his�life,�but�he�felt�there�were�no�other�options.�“Some
guys� are� just� unlucky,”� he� thought.� “Some� guys� just� aren’t� meant� to� leave� their
mark.”
Grant�felt�defeated�because�he�thought�that�all�he�could�do�was�what�he’d�always
done—and� because� he� wasn’t� thinking� like� a� designer.� Designers� know� that� you
never�go�with�your�first�idea.�Designers�know�that�when�you�choose�from�lots�of
options�you�choose�better.�Many�people�are�like�Grant:�they�get�stuck�trying�to
make�their�first�idea�work.
Grant�needed�to�start�thinking�like�a�designer.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�I’m�stuck.
Reframe:�I’m�never�stuck,�because�I�can�always�generate�a�lot�of�ideas.
Sharon�is�a�paralegal�who�worked�at�a�prestigious�law�firm�in�Boston�until�she�was
laid�off.�Now�she�spends�six�hours�a�day�on�the�Internet,�looking�for�a�job.�She’s
been�doing�this�for�over�a�year.�She’s�completely�demoralized;�any�shred�of�self-
confidence�evaporated�long�ago.�In�fact,�being�a�paralegal�wasn’t�her�goal�in�the
first�place—it�was�her�backup�plan.�She�went�to�business�school,�but�the�economy
was�in�the�dumpster�when�she�graduated�in�2009.�She�could�not�find�a�job�as�a
marketing�executive,�which�she�had�been�told�was�the�“right�thing”�to�do�with�an
M.B.A.�Like�so�many,�she�thought�that�doing�the�“right�thing”�would�make�her
happy.�But�Sharon�wasn’t�remotely�close�to�happy.�The�truth�is�that�Sharon�had
no�idea�what�she�really�wanted�out�of�business�school,�and�this�lack�of�genuine
interest�was�probably�apparent�to�the�people�who�interviewed�her.�She�had�spent�a
long�time�trying�to�do�the�right�thing�instead�of�doing�what�was�right�for�Sharon.
A�year�into�her�job�search,�she�felt�she�was�out�of�options.�She�felt�defeated.�But
Sharon�wasn’t�really� out�of�options—she� just�hadn’t�come� up�with�a� lot�of�real
options�in�the�first�place.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�I�have�to�find�the�one�right�idea.
Reframe:�I�need�a�lot�of�ideas�so�that�I�can�explore�any�number�of�possibilities
for�my�future.
With� no� idea� other� than� to� keep� on� doing� what� she� was� doing,� Sharon,� like
Grant,�was�stuck.
—
Most�people�do�the�same�thing�Sharon�did�when�they�need�work:�they�look�at�the
job�listings�and�look�for�a�job�that�they�think�they�can�get.�This�is�one�of�the�worst
ways� to� get� a� job,� and� actually� has� the� lowest� success� rate� (we’ll� discuss� the
phenomenon�in�detail�in�chapter�7).�This�way�of�thinking�is�not�design�thinking;
it’s�just�grasping�whatever�might�be�in�reach,�and�it’s�unlikely�to�result�in�long-
term�satisfaction.�If�the�kids�are�hungry,�the�bank�is�about�to�foreclose�on�your
house,� or� you� owe� a� guy� named� Louie� a� lot� of� money,� then� by� all� means� take
whatever� job� you� can� get.� But� when� the� wolf� has� backed� off� a� bit,� it’s� time� to
wayfind� to� jobs� you� might� actually� want.� And� don’t� worry� about� being� stuck.
Designers�get�stuck�all�the�time.�Being�stuck�can�be�a�launching�pad�for�creativity.
When�you�think�like�a�designer,�you�know�how�to�ideate—how�to�“flare”—to�come
up�with�lots�of�options�for�lots�of�possible�futures.
Look,�it’s�simple.�You�can’t�know�what�you�want�until�you�know�what�you�might
want,�so�you�are�going�to�have�to�generate�a�lot�of�ideas�and�possibilities.
Accept�the�problem.
Get�stuck.
Get�over�it,�and�ideate,�ideate,�ideate!
Ideate�This
We’re�going�to�ask�you�to�get�out�of�the�box�of�being�realistic�and�venture�into�the
wide�world�of�“what�I�might�want.”�It’s�time�to�embrace�being�stuck.�Grant�was
stuck.�Sharon�was�stuck.�We’re�all�stuck�in�some�way�in�some�areas�of�our�lives.
That’s�where�we�need�ideation,�which�is�a�fancy�word�for�coming�up�with�lots�of
ideas.�Wild�ideas.�Crazy�ideas.�We’re�going�to�teach�you�how�to�have�more�ideas
than�you�ever�thought�possible.�So�many�people�get�stuck�chasing�their�first�idea,
or�the�perfect�idea,�or�that�one�big�idea�that�will�solve�the�problem,�will�be�the
answer,�and�will�dig�them�out�of�whatever�hole�they�are�currently�stuck�in.�That’s�a
lot� of� pressure.� Believing� that� there’s� only� one� idea� out� there� leads� to� a� lot� of
pressure�and�indecision.
“I’m�just�not�sure.”
“I�don’t�want�to�blow�it.”
“I�really�need�to�get�this�right.”
“If�I�just�had�a�better�(the�right,�a�killer)�idea,�then�all�would�be�well.”
Let’s�stop�right�here,�so�we�can�be�the�first�to�tell�you�an�amazing�fact:�All�will
be�well.
It�will.
Those�of�us�fortunate�enough�to�live�in�the�modern�world�with�access�to�some
degree�of�choice,�freedom,�mobility,�education,�and�technology�spend�most�of�our
time�immersed�in�a�world�obsessed�with�optimization.�There’s�always�got�to�be�a
better�idea,�a�better�way—even�a�best�way.�That�kind�of�thinking�is�pretty�dangerous
to�life�design.�The�truth�is�that�all�of�us�have�more�than�one�life�in�us.�When�we
ask� our� students,� “How� many� lifetimes’� worth� of� living� are� there� in� you?,”� the
average� answer� is� 3.4.� And� if� you� accept� this� idea—that� there� are� multiple� great
designs�for�your�life,�though�you’ll�still�only�get�to�live�one—it�is�rather�liberating.
There�is�no�one�idea�for�your�life.�There�are�many�lives�you�could�live�happily�and
productively� (no� matter� how� many� years� old� you� are),� and� there� are� lots� of
different�paths�you�could�take�to�live�each�of�those�productive,�amazingly�different
lives.�So�do�the�math;�this�adds�up�to�tons�of�different�possible�ideas�you�might
have.�And�we’re�going�to�give�you�the�tools�to�generate�such�ideas.
Quantity�has�a�quality�all�its�own.�In�life�design,�more�is�better,�because�more
ideas� equal� access� to� better� ideas,� and� better� ideas� lead� to� a� better� design.
Expanding� your� thinking� improves� your� ability� to� ideate� and� allows� for� more
innovation.�If�you�work�through�lots�of�ideas,�your�chances�of�hitting�on�some
that� can� be� really� energizing� for� you� go� up,� which� increases� your� chance� of
creating�something�that�can�work�and�that�you’ll�love.�More�ideas�also�equal�new
insights.
Designers�love�to�ideate�broadly�and�wildly.�They�love�the�crazy�ideas�as�much
as�or�more�than�the�sensible�ones.�Why?�Most�people�think�that�designers�are�just
“out�there”�and�prefer�crazy�stuff�because�they’re�edgy,�avant-garde,�dark-sunglass-
wearing� kinds� of� people� (think� berets,� cool� shoes,� and� the� hippest� restaurants).
That�may�be�true,�but�it’s�not�the�point.�Designers�learn�to�have�lots�of�wild�ideas
because� they� know� that� the� number� one� enemy� of� creativity� is� judgment.� Our
brains�are�so�tightly�wired�to�be�critical,�find�problems,�and�leap�to�judgment�that
it’s�a�wonder�any�ideas�ever�make�it�out!�We�have�to�defer�judgment�and�silence�the
inner�critic�if�we�want�to�get�all�our�ideas�out.�If�we�don’t,�we�may�have�a�few�good
ideas,�but�the�majority�will�have�been�lost—silently�imprisoned�behind�the�wall�of
judgment�our�prefrontal�cortex�has�erected�to�safeguard�us�from�making�mistakes
or�looking�foolish.�Now,�we�love�the�prefrontal�cortex�and�wouldn’t�be�caught�in
public�without�it,�but�we�don’t�want�it�taking�our�ideas�hostage�prematurely.�If�we
can� get� out� into� the� wild� idea� space,� then� we� know� we’ve� overcome� premature
judgment.�The�crazy�ideas�may�not�be�the�ones�we�pick�(and�rarely�are,�actually),
but�often�after�having�the�crazy�ideas,�we�have�moved�to�a�new�creative�space,�and
we�can�see�new�and�innovative�possibilities�that�can�work.
So�let’s�bring�on�the�crazy.
Usually� our� students� find� this� part� of� the� process� to� be� the� most� exciting,
engaging,�and�just�plain�fun.�Who�doesn’t�like�to�generate�a�lot�of�great�and�crazy
ideas?�You�may�or�may�not�think�that�you�are�a�creative�person,�but�that�doesn’t
matter.� Remember� our� motto� “You� Are� Here,”� and� get� ready� to� work� with
whatever�level�of�personal�creativity�you�think�you�have.�We’ll�build�from�there.
Our�goal�is�to�energize�and�expand�on�your�capacity�for�generating�lots�and�lots�of
solutions�to�the�myriad�problems�that�come�up�when�you�are�designing�your�life.
As�a�life�designer,�you�need�to�embrace�two�philosophies:
1. You�choose�better�when�you�have�lots�of�good�ideas�to�choose
from.
2. You�never�choose�your�first�solution�to�any�problem.
Our� minds� are� generally� lazy� and� like� to� get� rid� of� problems� as� quickly� as
possible,�so�they�surround�first�ideas�with�a�lot�of�positive�chemicals�to�make�us
“fall�in�love”�with�them.�Do�not�fall�in�love�with�your�first�idea.�This�relationship
almost�never�works�out.�Most�often,�our�first�solutions�are�pretty�average�and�not
very�creative.�Humans�have�a�tendency�to�suggest�the�obvious�first.�Learning�to�use
great�ideation�tools�helps�you�overcome�this�bias�toward�the�obvious�and�helps
you�regain�a�sense�of�creative�confidence.
Even� those� of� you� who� might� think� that� you� are� not� creative� can� probably
remember� back� to� a� time� when� you� didn’t� feel� this� way.� Perhaps� it� was� in
kindergarten,�or�first�or�second�grade,�when�singing,�dancing,�and�drawing�seemed
like� natural� forms� of� self-expression.� You� were� not� self-conscious,� nor� were� you
judging� whether� your� drawings� were� art,� or� your� singing� professional,� or� your
dancing�worthy�of�others’�attention.�You�felt�free�to�create�any�natural�form�of
your�own�self-expression�without�limits.
You�can�probably�also�remember,�typically�in�vivid�detail,�a�time�when�a�teacher
said,�“You’re�not�an�artist,�you�can’t�draw,”�or�a�classmate�said,�“You�dance�funny,”
or� some� other� adult� said,� “Stop� singing,� you’re� ruining� the� song� for� everyone.”
Ouch!� We’re� sorry� if� this� creativity-killing� moment� happened� to� you.� And� the
creativity-killing� moments� kept� happening� in� middle� school� and� high� school,
where�social�norms�took�the�place�of�scolding�adults,�and�we�learned�to�rein�in�our
differences� for� fear� of� being� called� out.� It’s� a� wonder� that� any� shred� of� our
personal�creativity�survives�as�we�grow�up.
But�trust�us,�it’s�in�there.�We’re�going�to�help�you�discover�it.
Mind�Mapping
The�first�ideation�technique�we’re�going�to�teach�you�is�called�mind�mapping.�It’s�a
great�tool�for�ideating�by�yourself,�and�a�great�method�for�getting�unstuck.�Mind
mapping�works�by�using�simple�free�association�of�words,�one�after�another,�to
open�up�the�idea�space�and�come�up�with�new�solutions.�The�graphical�nature�of
the�method�allows�ideas�and�their�associations�to�be�captured�automatically.�This
technique�teaches�you�to�generate�lots�of�ideas,�and�because�it�is�a�visual�method,�it
bypasses�your�inner�logical/verbal�censor.
The�mind-mapping�process�has�three�steps:
1. Picking�a�topic
2. Making�the�mind�map
3. Making�secondary�connections�and�creating�concepts�(mashing�it
all�up)
The�image�above�is�of�Grant’s�mind�map,�which�he�made�while�being�stuck�on
the�problem�of�how�to�find�the�“perfect”�job.�You’ll�remember�that�when�Grant
looked�over�his�Good�Time�Journal�the�only�positive�experiences�he�could�find
had�something�to�do�with�hiking�in�the�redwoods�near�his�house.�So�he�decided�to
mind-map�around�that.�You�can�see�he�put�BEING�OUTDOORS�in�the�center�of�his
mind�map�and�drew�a�circle�around�it.�This�is�step�one.
Step�two�is�making�the�mind�map.�For�this,�you�take�the�original�idea�and�write
down�five�or�six�things�related�to�that�idea.�Be�rigorous�in�writing�down�the�first
words�that�come�to�mind.�Now�repeat�this�process�with�the�words�in�the�second
ring.�Draw�three�or�four�lines�from�each�word,�and�free-associate�new�words�related
to�these�prompts.�The�words�that�come�up�for�you�do�not�need�to�be�associated�to
the�words�or�question�in�the�center,�only�the�word�in�the�second�ring.�Repeat�this
process�until�you�have�at�least�three�or�four�rings�of�word�associations.
In�Grant’s�example,�he�wrote�down�travel,�hiking,�surfing,�camping,�and�nature.
These�things�are�all�related�directly�to�his�idea�of�BEING�OUTDOORS.�He�then�took
each� of� those� words� and� created� new� branches� of� word� associations.� Hiking
reminded�Grant�of�mountains,�which�led�to�explorers.�Travel�led�him�to�Hawaii,
Europe,� and� backpacking,� and� Hawaii� led� him� to� tropical� beaches.� France,� an
association�with�Europe,�took�him�to�crêpes,�which�took�him�to�Nutella,�which,
though�interesting,�turned�out�to�be�a�dead�end.�But�surfing�led�to�beaches,�which
led�to�tides,�which�led�to�cycles,�bicycles,�and�racing.�It�also�led�to�Jamaica,�then
through�Usain�Bolt�(Grant’s�brain�turns�out�to�be�more�creative�than�he�thought),
and�on�to�the�idea�of�exotic�locations.
This�whole�process�of�creating�layers�and�word�associations�took�three�to�five
minutes;�you�want�to�give�yourself�a�time�limit�so�you�do�this�fast�and�bypass�your
inner� censor.� The� next� step� is� to� take� this� random� association� of� words� and
highlight� a� few� things� that� might� be� interesting� (or� that� jump� out� at� you)� and
mash�them�together�into�a�few�concepts.�You�want�to�pick�from�the�very�outer
layer�or�perimeter�of�the�mind�map,�because�that�is�the�stuff�that�is�two�or�three
steps�away�from�your�conscious�thinking.�Even�though�being�outdoors�eventually
took�Grant�to�bicycle�racing�and�Usain�Bolt,�in�Grant’s�hidden�unconscious�these
are�all�linked�back�to�his�original�prompt.�Grant�pulled�out�the�random�words�that
seemed� interesting—in� this� case,� explorers,� tropical� beaches,� pirates,� kids,� exotic
locations,� and� bicycle� racing.� Then� he� took� these� individual� components� and
mashed�them�up�into�a�couple�of�possible�ideas.
Could�he�work�part-time�at�an�Explorer�Camp�for�kids�who�liked�the�outdoors?
Better�yet,�make�it�a�Pirate�Camp�and�have�it�at�a�beach?�How�about�accepting�the
promotion�he�was�offered,�but�only�if�they�let�him�move�to�a�rental�office�near�a
beach�(he�looked�it�up�and�found�that�his�company�had�an�office�in�Santa�Cruz,
California—yes!)?�Or,�even�better,�someplace�really�exotic,�like�Hawaii,�where�he
could�coach�at�a�Pirate�Surf�Camp�for�kids�(turns�out�his�company�had�an�office
there,�too).�And�maybe,�if�he�accepted�the�promotion,�he’d�make�enough�money
to�afford�a�four-day�workweek�so�that�he’d�have�some�time�to�“explore”�some�of
these�new�ideas.
This�is�innovation.
Grant�is�no�longer�stuck.�In�fact,�he�has�more�good�ideas�than�he�knows�what�to
do�with.�And,�more�important,�he’s�starting�to�think�that�it’s�not�about�finding�the
perfect�job,�it’s�about�making�the�job�he�has�“perfect.”�It�turns�out�it�pays�to�work
for�a�multinational�car-rental�company�with�offices�all�over�the�world.�Doing�his
mind�map�made�Grant�realize�that�he�has�more�to�work�with�than�he�thought,�and
he�can�use�his�current�job�as�the�springboard�to�what’s�next.
It’s�important�to�remember�when�you�do�this�not�to�censor�your�words.�That’s
why�we�suggest�you�do�it�fast.�Just�write�down�the�first�words�that�come�to�mind.�If
you�censor�yourself,�you�limit�your�potential�for�generating�new�and�novel�ideas.
David�Kelley,�the�founder�of�the�d.school,�says�you�often�have�to�go�through�the
wild�ideas�to�get�to�the�actionable�good�ideas.�So�don’t�be�afraid�to�come�up�with
crazy� stuff.� It� may� be� the� jumping-off� point� for� something� really� practical� and
really�new.�Also,�you�should�create�your�mind�map�on�a�big�piece�of�paper.�You
are�looking�for�lots�of�ideas—so�make�your�map�as�graphic�and�as�big�as�possible.
Go�out�and�get�a�giant�piece�of�butcher�paper�or�a�large�white�board,�and�have�big
ideas.
The�bigger�the�better.
Stuck�on�Steroids:�Anchor�Problems
There’s�a�certain�class�of�problems—the�ones�that�just�won’t�go�away—that�we�call
anchor�problems.�Like�a�physical�anchor,�they�hold�us�in�one�place�and�prevent
motion.� They� keep� us� stuck,� much� as� Grant� and� Sharon� were� stuck� with� their
career�problems.�If�we�are�going�to�practice�good�life�design,�it�is�important�to
notice�when�we�are�stuck�with�an�anchor�problem.
Dave�found�himself�with�an�anchor�problem,�but�it�didn’t�have�to�do�with�his
career,�like�Grant�and�Sharon;�this�problem�hit�closer�to�home.�You�see,�Dave�is�a
shop�kind�of�guy—as�in�“workshop.”�His�dad�(Dave�the�Third)�was�an�incredible
craftsman�and�had�an�amazing�shop,�so�of�course�Dave�had�to�have�a�cool�shop,
too.�But�Dave�is�less�craftsman�and�more�fix-it�guy,�so�he�didn’t�need�quite�the
same� shop� layout� as� his� dad.� This� means� that,� with� careful� planning� and
maintenance,� Dave� has� been� able� to� achieve� the� all-time� garage� twofer—a� killer
shop�that�still�allows�room�to�park�the�cars�inside.
Don’t�judge�Dave’s�dreams.
He�loved�it�and�vowed�he’d�have�that�kind�of�garage�the�rest�of�his�life.�And
then�he�moved�to�the�beach.�And�in�that�move�he�found�out�he�had�a�fifth�of�his
former� storage� space� to� fit� his� stuff� in.� And� he� found� himself� with� an� anchor
problem,�an�anchor�problem�that’s�lasted�years.
For�the�first�few�years,�Dave�had�to�rent�three�storage�units�in�addition�to�filling
the�garage�at�the�beach.�One�by�one,�year�after�year,�he�got�rid�of�the�storage�units,
but�the�last�car-evicting�pile�of�junk�has�never�been�cleared�from�the�garage.�And�as
far�as�getting�the�shop�properly�laid�out…well,�don’t�ask.�He’s�lived�with�the�All-
American�Garage�Disaster�for�over�five�years�now,�and�of�course�he’s�gotten�too
used�to�it.�Every�summer�for�four�years,�he’s�vowed�to�clean�it�out�and�get�the�shop
set�up,�but�he’s�been�overwhelmed�every�time.�Though�he’s�got�a�vision�of�his�old,
near-perfect�garage�layout,�he�fears�he’ll�just�never�get�there.�He�begins�in�earnest,
removing� the� first� layer� of� old� bike� parts� and� VHS� tapes,� but� then� he� gets
discouraged�at�the�looming�pile,�and�distracts�himself�with�something�more�doable
—like� replacing� the� alternator� in� the� truck.� Fix-it� guy� strikes� again.� Then� it’s
Christmas,�with�all�those�boxes�down�from�the�attic,�and…fuhgedaboudit.
Dave�is�anchored�on�this�problem�because�he’s�anchored�to�the�one�and�only
solution�he’s�been�willing�to�accept—a�perfect�cars-plus-workshop�layout.�It’s�such�a
huge� job� now,� Dave� doesn’t� even� try,� so� everybody� gets� to� slalom� through� the
obstacle�course�of�the�garage�while�the�ocean�sun�and�salt�air�fade�the�paint�on�the
cars�parked�outside.
The� only� way� Dave� can� get� unanchored� from� this� immovable� situation� is� to
reframe�his�solution�and�prototype�a�little.�He�could:
1. Reframe�so�that�the�goal�is�just�a�workbench�and�inside�storage
for�bikes�and�camping�gear.
2. Reframe�so�that�he�still�needs�just�one�small�storage�unit�(for�life),
and�buy�back�his�garage�for�about�a�hundred�dollars�a�month.
3. Be�mindful�of�process�and�break�it�into�smaller�projects:�(a)�give
away�old�books�and�music,�(b)�reduce�to�only�four�bikes,�(c)�clear
the�floor�of�boxes,�(d)�clear�the�workbench�of�old�project�detritus.
The�big�move�here�is�to�get�rid�of�the�image�of�the�perfect�garage�and�reimagine
a� different� result� or� steps� along� the� way.� If� Dave� keeps� the� picture� of� his� old,
perfect� garage� (the� solution)� pasted� on� that� refrigerator� door� in� his� mind,� he’s
never�going�to�get�anywhere,�because�it’s�too�hard.�Too�hard�doesn’t�work.
This� isn’t� a� gravity� problem—it’s� not� impossible.� It’s� just� that� Dave’s� stuck
because�he’s�anchored�himself�to�a�solution�that�can’t�work.
—
Melanie� taught� sociology� at� a� small� liberal-arts� college� and� was� impressed� by
developments� in� the� burgeoning� fields� of� social� innovation� and� social
entrepreneurship�that�were�transforming�what�nonprofit�organizations�could�do
using�insights�from�the�start-up�and�venture�capital�world.�Knowing�that�students
were�really�interested�in�new�approaches�to�social�impact,�she�started�teaching�a
course�and�sponsoring�social�innovation�projects.�It�went�great,�but�she�wanted�to
do�more.�She�longed�to�make�a�lasting�impact�on�her�college�and�dreamed�up�a
vision�to�found�a�new�Institute�for�Social�Innovation.
All�she�needed�was�fifteen�million�dollars�to�endow�it�properly�and�do�it�right.
So�she�set�about�the�task�of�raising�the�money.�She�developed�a�strategy�and�a�killer
pitch� for� the� idea.� Students� loved� it.� Administrators� were� supportive.� The
development�office�hated�it.
Like�most�small�colleges,�Melanie’s�school�was�underfunded�and�struggling�to
keep� up.� Its� alumni� roster� was� not� overloaded� with� zillionaires,� and� the
development�office�vigilantly�guarded�relationships�with�the�few�major�donors�the
college�had�recruited.�Melanie�was�given�a�long�“Hands�off!”�list�of�the�college’s
key�donors,�including�individuals�and�foundations.�She�was�free�to�solicit�anyone
not�on�the�list,�but�that�was�it.
This�was�quite�a�setback,�but�Melanie�had�a�dream�worthy�of�her�time,�so�she
went�for�it.�You�can�guess�the�rest.�She�networked�and�pitched�tirelessly�for�two
years—and�got�nowhere.�She�signed�up�a�few�commitments,�but�they�were�all�way
too� small.� Any� big� donors� she� discovered� got� scooped� up� by� the� development
office� for� other� things.� Melanie’s� goal� remained� totally� out� of� reach.� Without
access� to� the� few� strategic� donors� to� the� college,� she’d� never� raise� the� fifteen
million.
She�was�stuck.�Unnecessarily.
Melanie�believed�that�her�problem�was�getting�fifteen�million�dollars�to�fund
her�social�innovation�institute.�But�that�wasn’t�her�problem;�that�was�just�her�first
idea�of�a�solution�to�her�problem,�and�she�got�so�anchored�to�that�idea�that�she
was�mired�in�stuckness�and�failure.�Oh,�and�did�we�mention�that�she�was�getting
depressed�by�all�this�rejection,�and�that�her�teaching�was�suffering�from�the�fund-
raising�distraction,�and�that�her�colleagues,�sick�of�the�Melanie�money�lament,�had
begun�avoiding�her?�You�see,�when�you�anchor�yourself�to�a�bad�solution,�it�just
gets�worse�and�worse�with�time.
Melanie’s� real� problem� was� wanting� to� make� a� lasting� impact� on� her� college
through�social�innovation—not�funding�an�institute.�She�made�a�classic�mistake�of
jumping�to�one�solution�too�quickly.�With�help,�Melanie�got�unstuck�by�adopting
a� design� thinking� mind-set,� remembering� what� her� real� problem� was,� and
exploring�some�prototypes.�She�realized�that�she’d�come�up�with�the�institute�idea
(and� its� fifteen-million-dollar� price� tag)� all� on� her� own� one� day� and� had� never
really�considered�alternatives.�She�applied�the�mind-set�of�curiosity�to�the�situation
and�did�some�more�investigating�before�finally�settling�on�just�what�it�was�she�was
trying�to�do.
She� decided� to� frame� an� interesting� question� and� talk� to� lots� of� people� on
campus.�She�began�interviewing�campus�leaders,�asking,�“How�do�you�think�social
innovation�can�be�a�part�of�our�college,�and�where�would�we�start?”�She�had�lots�of
great� conversations� and� got� lots� of� ideas.� People� suggested� theme� dorms,
alternative�spring-break�programming,�a�summer�internship�program,�and�a�new
senior�thesis�project�curriculum.�There�were�lots�of�ways�to�make�an�institutional
impact�on�the�college�without�having�to�start�(and�fund)�a�new�institute.�Sure,�the
institute�would�be�cooler�and�bigger�and�sexier�and�would�maybe�even�have�more
of�an�impact,�but�it�was�also�nearly�impossible.�The�other�ideas�were�much�cheaper
and�also�enlisted�more�new�supporters,�so�Melanie�was�no�longer�the�sole�advocate
on�campus.�She�formed�a�joint�student-faculty�team,�and�they�concluded�that�a
social-innovation�theme�dorm�was�the�best�idea.
So�they�prototyped�it.�First�they�canvassed�all�the�existing�theme�dorms�to�see
what�they�were�doing�that�worked�and�didn’t�work.�In�the�process,�they�met�the
students�who�liked�the�new�dorm�idea.�The�team�invited�those�students�to�form�a
club�on�campus�as�a�first�step.�The�club�ran�for�two�years�to�test�projects,�work�the
idea� into� the� campus� culture,� and� build� credibility.� Then� four� club� members
jointly�applied�to�be�resident�assistants�in�the�same�dorm�their�senior�year�and�got
the�dorm�manager’s�permission�to�run�a�social-innovation�pilot�program�the�next
year.�It�went�great,�and�was�renewed�the�following�year.�The�year�after�that,�the
dorm�was�officially�themed�for�social�innovation,�Melanie�was�named�its�faculty
adviser,�and�the�VP�of�student�housing�became�its�staunchest�advocate.
By� reframing� the� problem,� using� curiosity,� prototyping,� and� a� little� radical
collaboration,�Melanie�made�a�permanent�change�in�the�campus�culture�and�the
housing�system.�She�had�a�lasting�impact�on�the�institution,�without�ever�having
to�fund�an�institute.
—
John�also�had�an�anchor�problem.�Ever�since�hearing�about�it�when�he�was�a�Boy
Scout,�he�had�dreamed�of�taking�the�mule�trip�from�the�rim�to�the�bottom�of�the
Grand�Canyon,�and�promised�himself�that�one�day�he�would�do�it.�Then�life�got
in�the�way;�he�had�a�career�to�launch�and�a�family�to�start.�No�problem—he�would
make�the�trip�with�his�wife�and�kids�and�create�an�awesome�family�memory.�But
by�the�time�John�could�afford�that�vacation�for�his�family�of�five,�he’d�grown�in
size,� too,� and� now� weighed� in� at� 221� pounds.� The� mule� rider� limit� was� 200
pounds.�Every�spring�for�five�years,�John�went�on�a�diet�to�try�to�get�down�to�199
pounds�so�he�could�make�the�trip�that�summer.�One�year�he�dieted�down�to�212,
another�year�208.�Once�he�got�to�203�(well…209�fully�dressed�with�a�water�bottle).
He�was�getting�better�at�dieting,�but�not�fast�enough.�His�kids�were�getting�older
and�had�other�plans�for�their�summer�than�hanging�around�donkeys�with�their
parents�for�three�days.
It�never�happened.�That�family�memory�doesn’t�exist.
John�got�anchored�to�his�idea�about�the�solution.�It�had�to�be�the�mule�ride.�If
he’d�stepped�back�and�recognized�that�his�one�solution,�though�not�impossible,
was�taking�too�long�to�achieve�and�had�a�lousy�chance�of�success,�he�could�have
saved�it.�He�could�have�reframed�the�idea�from�“Take�the�Grand�Canyon�Mule
Ride”�to�“See�the�Grand�Canyon�Top�to�Bottom.”�There�were�lots�of�ways�to�do
that—by�helicopter,�by�river,�and�by�foot.�John’s�chances�of�training�successfully
for�the�hike�up�and�down�that�trail�were�about�ten�times�better�than�his�chances�of
ever�tipping�the�scales�under�200.
The� moral� to� the� stories� of� Dave,� Melanie,� and� John� is� this:� Don’t� make� a
doable� problem� into� an� anchor� problem� by� wedding� yourself� irretrievably� to� a
solution�that�just�isn’t�working.�Reframe�the�solution�to�some�other�possibilities,
prototype� those� ideas� (take� some� test� hikes),� and� get� yourself� unstuck.� Anchor
problems�keep�us�stuck�because�we�can�only�see�one�solution—the�one�we�already
have�that�doesn’t�work.�Anchor�problems�are�not�only�about�our�current,�failed
approach.�They�are�really�about�the�fear�that,�no�matter�what�else�we�try,�that�won’t
work�either,�and�then�we’ll�have�to�admit�that�we’re�permanently�stuck—meaning
we’re� screwed—and� we’d� rather� be� stuck� than� screwed.� Sometimes� it� is� more
comfortable�to�hold�on�to�our�familiar,�failed�approach�to�the�problem�than�to
risk�a�worse�failure�by�attempting�the�big�changes�that�we�think�will�be�required�to
eliminate�it.�This�is�a�pretty�common�but�paradoxical�human�behavior.�Change�is
always�uncertain,�and�there�is�no�guarantee�of�success,�no�matter�how�hard�you�try.
It�makes�sense�to�be�fearful.�The�way�forward�is�to�reduce�the�risk�(and�the�fear)�of
failure�by�designing�a�series�of�small�prototypes�to�test�the�waters.�It�is�okay�for
prototypes� to� fail—they� are� supposed� to—but� well-designed� prototypes� teach� you
something�about�the�future.
Prototypes�lower�your�anxiety,�ask�interesting�questions,�and�get�you�data�about
the� potential� of� the� change� that� you� are� trying� to� accomplish.� One� of� the
principles�of�design�thinking�is�that�you�want�to�“fail�fast�and�fail�forward,”�into
your� next� step.� When� you’re� stuck� with� an� anchor� problem,� try� reframing� the
challenge�as�an�exploration�of�possibilities�(instead�of�trying�to�solve�your�huge
problem� in� one� miraculous� leap),� then� decide� to� try� a� series� of� small,� safe
prototypes� of� the� change� you’d� like� to� see� happen.� It� should� result� in� getting
unstuck�and�finding�a�more�creative�approach�to�your�problem.�We�will�talk�a�lot
more�about�prototyping�in�chapter�6.
Before�we�leave�the�topic�of�anchor�problems�entirely,�we�need�to�make�clear
how�they�differ�from�the�gravity�problems�mentioned�in�chapter�1.�They�are�both
really�nasty�problem�types�that�keep�people�stuck,�but�they’re�entirely�different�in
nature.�An�anchor�problem�is�a�real�problem,�just�a�hard�one.�It’s�actionable—but
we’ve�been�stuck�on�it�so�long�or�so�often�that�it�seems�insurmountable�(which�is
why� such� a� problem� has� to� be� reframed,� then� opened� up� with� new� ideas,� then
knocked�down�to�size�by�prototyping).�Gravity�problems�aren’t�actually�problems.
They’re�circumstances�that�you�can�do�nothing�to�change.�There�is�no�solution�to
a� gravity� problem—only� acceptance� and� redirection.� You� can’t� defy� the� laws� of
nature,�nor�do�we�live�in�a�world�where�poets�reliably�make�a�million�dollars�a
year.�Life�designers�know�that�if�a�problem�isn’t�actionable,�then�it’s�not�solvable.
Designers�may�be�artful�at�reframing�and�inventing,�but�they�know�better�than�to
go�up�against�the�laws�of�nature�or�the�marketplace.
We�are�here�to�get�you�unstuck.
We�want�you�to�have�lots�of�ideas�and�lots�of�options.
When� you� have� lots� of� ideas,� you� can� build� prototypes� of� your� life� and� test
them�out.�That’s�what�life�designers�do.
Mind�Mapping�with�Your�Good�Time�Journal
If�you�didn’t�do�your�Good�Time�Journal�in�the�last�chapter,�please�go�back�and
do�it�now;�you�are�going�to�need�it�for�this�exercise.�We�are�going�to�do�three
different�mind�maps,�each�one�extending�out�at�least�three�or�four�layers,�and�with
at�least�a�dozen�or�more�elements�in�the�outermost�ring.
Mind�Map�1—Engagement
Mind�Map�1—Engagement
From�your�Good�Time�Journal,�pick�one�of�the�areas�of�greatest�interest�to�you,�or
an� activity� during� which� you� were� really� engaged� (e.g.,� balancing� the� budget� or
pitching�a�new�idea),�and�make�it�the�center�of�your�map.�Then�generate�a�bunch
of�connected�words�and�concepts,�using�the�mind-mapping�technique.
Mind�Map�2—Energy
From� your� Good� Time� Journal,� pick� something� you’ve� identified� as� really
energizing�you�in�your�work�and�life�(e.g.,�art�class,�giving�feedback�to�colleagues,
health-care�access,�keeping�things�running�right)�and�mind-map�this�out.
Mind�Map�3—Flow
From�your�Good�Time�Journal,�pick�one�of�the�experiences�when�you�were�in�a
state�of�flow,�put�the�experience�itself�at�the�center�of�a�mind�map,�and�complete
your�mapping�of�your�experience�with�this�state�(e.g.,�speaking�in�front�of�a�large
audience�or�brainstorming�creative�ideas).
Now� that� you’ve� done� these� three� mind� maps,� we’re� going� to� invent� an
interesting,�though�not�necessarily�practical,�life�alternative�from�each.
1. Look�at�the�outer�ring�of�one�of�your�maps�and�pick�three
disparate�items�that�catch�your�eye.�You’ll�know�which�ones�they
are�intuitively—they�should�literally�“jump�out”�at�you.
2. Now�try�to�combine�those�three�items�into�a�possible�job
description�that�would�be�fun�and�interesting�to�you�and�would
be�helpful�to�someone�else�(again,�it�need�not�be�practical�or
appeal�to�lots�of�people�or�employers).
3. Name�your�role�and�draw�a�napkin�sketch�of�it�(a�quick�visual
drawing�of�what�it�is),�like�the�one�shown�here.�For�example,�when
Grant�(who�was�languishing�away�at�the�car-rental�agency)�did
this�exercise�based�on�when�he�was�engaged�in�his�life�(hiking�in
redwoods,�playing�pickup�basketball,�helping�his�niece�and
nephew),�he�ended�up�drawing�a�sketch�of�himself�leading�a
Pirate�Surf�Camp�for�children.
4. Do�this�exercise�three�times—once�for�each�of�your�mind�maps—
making�sure�that�the�three�versions�are�different�from�one
another.
Now�What?
You�might�now�be�thinking,�“This�is�terrific!�There�are�some�really�cool�ideas�here
I�can�definitely�use!”�If�so,�that’s�great—but�it’s�not�guaranteed�and�it’s�not�typical.
Or…you�might�have�completed�this�and�are�now�saying�to�yourself,�“Well,�that
was�silly!�What�the�heck�is�the�point�of�coming�up�with�all�these�random�nonsense
ideas?”�If�that’s�you,�you�didn’t�get�your�money’s�worth�out�of�the�exercise.�The
whole�point�was�to�defer�judgment�and�quiet�your�internal�problem-finding�critic.
If� you� never� did,� you� probably� found� the� exercise� pretty� silly.� If� that’s� you,
welcome�to�the�club�of�smart�modern�people�trying�to�do�the�right�thing�(which�is
to�get�the�right�answer�right�away).�Take�another�look�at�your�work,�and�find�out�if
you�can�see�it�in�a�new�light,�or�come�back�and�try�again�in�a�few�days.
Or�you�might�be�thinking,�“Well,�that�was�pretty�fun�and�interesting,�but�I’m
not�really�sure�what�I’m�getting�out�of�this�yet.”�If�that�sounds�like�you,�you’re
doing�great.�The�point�of�this�exercise�isn’t�to�generate�a�specific�result;�it’s�to�get
your�mind�going�all�over�the�place�and�ideating�without�judgment.�By�taking�the
exercise� all� the� way� to� imagining� how� to� combine� elements� creatively� into
surprising�roles�or�jobs,�you’ve�successfully�moved�out�of�problem�solving�(what
do�I� do�next?)�into�design�thinking�(what� can�I� imagine?).� Now� you’re� working
with�a�designer’s�mind-set,�and�you’ve�got�lots�of�important�ideas�down�on�paper
in�a�creative�format.
It’s�time�to�start�the�task�of�innovating�three�real�alternative�lives.
It’s�time�for�your�Odyssey�Plans.
Try�Stuff
Mind�Mapping
1. Review�your�Good�Time�Journal�and�note�activities�in�which�you
were�engaged,�energized,�and�in�flow.
2. Choose�an�activity�that�you�were�engaged�in,�an�activity�that�you
felt�highly�energized�from,�and�something�you�did�that�brought
you�into�flow,�and�create�three�mind�maps—one�for�each.
3. Look�at�the�outer�ring�of�each�mind�map,�pick�three�things�that
jump�out�at�you,�and�create�a�job�description�from�them.
4. Create�a�role�for�each�job�description,�and�draw�a�napkin�sketch.
5
Design�Your�Lives
You�are�legion.
Each�of�us�is�many.
This�life�you�are�living�is�one�of�many�lives�you�will�live.
Now,� we� are� not� talking� about� reincarnation,� or� anything� with� religious
implications.�The�plain�and�simple�truth�is�that�you�will�live�many�different�lives
in�this�lifetime.�If�the�life�you�are�currently�living�feels�a�bit�off,�don’t�worry;�life
design�gives�you�endless�mulligans.�You�can�do�it�over�at�any�point,�at�any�time.
“Correction�shots”�are�always�allowed.
Working� with� adults� of� all� ages,� we’ve� found� that� where� people� go� wrong
(regardless� of� their� age,� education,� or� career� path)� is� thinking� they� just� need� to
come�up�with�a�plan�for�their�lives�and�it�will�be�smooth�sailing.�If�only�they�make
the�right�choice�(the�best,�true,�only�choice),�they�will�have�a�blueprint�for�who�they
will�be,�what�they�will�do,�and�how�they�will�live.�It’s�a�paint-by-numbers�approach
to� life,� but� in� reality,� life� is� more� of� an� abstract� painting—one� that’s� open� to
multiple�interpretations.
Chung� was� stressing� out.� He’d� worked� hard� all� through� his� career� at� UC
Berkeley�and�was�graduating�with�honors.�He�expected�to�go�to�graduate�school
eventually,�but�wanted�to�have�some�experience�first�in�his�chosen�profession�so
that�he�could�get�the�most�out�of�grad�school�and�launch�his�career�quickly.�To
keep� his� options� open,� Chung� applied� to� six� different� internship� programs,
varying�from�one�to�three�years�in�length.�Then�something�awful�happened.�He
was� accepted� into� four� of� the� six� internship� programs,� including� his� top� three
choices.�Getting�in�wasn’t�awful;�it�was�what�happened�next.�Total�indecision.�He
had� no� idea� what� to� do,� and� no� idea� how� to� solve� the� age-old� problem� of� not
knowing�what�to�do.
He�was�completely�unprepared�for�getting�into�his�three�top�choices,�and,�to
exacerbate�the�problem,�his�three�top�choices�were�completely�different�from�one
another.�One�was�teaching�in�rural�Asia,�one�was�doing�paralegal�work�with�an
anti–sex-slavery�nonprofit�in�Belgium,�and�one�was�doing�research�at�a�health-care
think�tank�in�Washington,�D.C.�They�were�all�great,�but�which�one�to�take?
Chung�knew�that�this�was�an�incredibly�important�decision,�because�where�he
did�his�internship�would�direct�his�graduate�studies,�and�what�he�got�his�graduate
degree�in�would�direct�his�career,�and�that�would�set�his�life�path.�If�he�didn’t�get�it
right,�he�risked�ending�up�in�a�“second�choice”�life.�But�he�didn’t�know�what�his
first�choice�was.�He�didn’t�know�which�was�best.
Chung�was�making�a�very�common�mistake.�He�thought�there�was�one�best�way
to�spend�his�life,�and�he�had�to�know�what�it�was�or�he’d�be�settling�for�second
best—or�worse.�But�that’s�not�true.�We�all�contain�enough�energy�and�talents�and
interests�to�live�many�different�types�of�lives,�all�of�which�could�be�authentic�and
interesting�and�productive.�Asking�which�life�is�best�is�asking�a�silly�question;�it’s
like�asking�whether�it’s�better�to�have�hands�or�feet.
After�Chung�came�to�office�hours,�Dave�asked�him,�“If�you’re�having�such�a
hard� time� picking,� are� you� sure� you� even� have� to?� If� you� could� do� all� three
internships,�one�after�another,�how�would�you�like�that?”�Chung�replied,�“I’d�love
to�do�that!�But�is�that�even�allowed?�How�do�I�get�permission�to�do�all�three?”
“Just�ask.�You’ve�got�nothing�to�lose�by�asking.”
He�did,�and,�to�his�great�surprise,�two�of�the�organizations�were�willing�to�wait;
he�could�do�all�three�over�the�next�five�years�if�he�wanted�to.
It�dawned�on�Chung,�finally,�that�the�reason�he�couldn’t�figure�out�which�one
was�best�was�that�there�was�no�best.�There�were�three�great�and�totally�different
possibilities�in�front�of�him.�At�this�point�in�his�life,�he�could�afford�to�check
them�all�out,�and�that’s�what�he�did.
Of�course,�what�finally�happened�was�something�Chung�had�never�imagined�at
all.� During� his� first,� two-year� internship,� he� stayed� in� contact� with� his� other
undergraduate�buddies,�talking�and�Skyping�regularly.�After�about�nine�months,
all�of�them�except�Chung�found�themselves�unhappy�and�disillusioned�with�life
after� college.� That� wasn’t� so� surprising.� Leaving� college� is� pretty� stressful,� and
Chung�was�having�some�struggles�on�the�job�himself,�but�what�was�different�was
how�everybody�felt�about�it.�Chung�had�learned�life�design.�He�had�tools�he�could
use,�and�accepted�that�there�was�more�than�one�happy�path�he�could�chart�his�life
by.� His� buddies� didn’t� have� that� confidence,� so� Chung� started� spending� time
helping�each�of�them�figure�out�what�they�could�do�next.�He�loved�doing�that.�In
fact,�he�loved�it�so�much�that�he�decided�to�investigate�how�he�could�do�the�same
kind�of�helping�all�the�time.�Right�after�that�first�internship,�he�canceled�the�next
two�and�went�to�grad�school�in�career�counseling.�After�finally�accepting�that�there
were� at� least� three� great� careers� he� could� live� into� well,� he� discovered� a� fourth.
That’s�the�sort�of�thing�that�happens�when�you�stop�trying�to�“get�it�right”�and
start�designing�your�way�forward.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�I�need�to�figure�out�my�best�possible�life,�make�a�plan,
and�then�execute�it.
Reframe:�There�are�multiple�great�lives�(and�plans)�within�me,�and�I�get�to
choose�which�one�to�build�my�way�forward�to�next.
Embrace�Your�Multiple�Personalities
One�of�the�most�powerful�ways�to�design�your�life�is�to�design�your�lives.�No,�we
haven’t�hit�our�heads�and�that�isn’t�a�typo.�We’re�going�to�ask�you�to�imagine�and
write�up�three�different�versions�of�the�next�five�years�of�your�life.�We�call�these
Odyssey�Plans.�Whether�or�not�three�interesting�variations�of�your�next�five�years
immediately�leap�onto�the�screens�in�the�multiplex�movie�theater�in�your�head�or
not,� we� know� you’ve� got� at� least� three� viable� and� substantially� different
possibilities�in�you.�We�all�do.�Every�single�one�of�the�thousands�of�people�we’ve
worked�with�has�proved�us�correct�in�this.�We�all�have�lots�of�lives�within�us.�We
certainly�have�three�at�any�particular�moment.�Of�course,�we�can�only�live�out�one
at�a�time,�but�we�want�to�ideate�multiple�variations�in�order�to�choose�creatively
and�generatively.
Now,�it�may�seem�a�daunting�task�to�come�up�with�three�different�plans,�but
you�can�do�it.�Everyone�we’ve�worked�with�has�done�it,�and�so�can�you.�You�may
well�have�a�preferred�plan�already�in�mind.�That’s�fine.�You�may�even�have�a�plan
that� you’ve� committed�to� and� that� is� well� under� way.� That’s� fine,� too—you� still
need�to�develop�three�Odyssey�Plan�alternatives.�Really.�Some�of�the�people�who’ve
gotten�the�most�out�of�this�exercise�are�the�ones�who�entered�into�it�already�having
all�the�answers�to�their�One�True�Plan�in�place.�The�value�of�conceiving�multiple
prototypes� in� parallel� (like� these� three� Odyssey� Plans)� has� been� validated� by
research�at�the�Stanford�Graduate�School�of�Education.�A�team�led�by�Professor
Dan�Schwartz�evaluated�two�groups.1�One�started�with�three�ideas�in�parallel,�then
subsequently�had�two�more�ideas�on�the�way�to�their�final�idea.�The�second�team
started�with�one�idea�and�then�iterated�four�more�times.�Each�team�generated�five
rounds�of�ideas,�but�the�parallel�team�did�much�better—generating�more�ideas�and
clearly� better� final� solutions.� The� serial� team—who� started� with� just� one� idea—
tended�to�keep�refining�the�same�idea�over�and�over,�never�really�innovating.�The
conclusion� is� that� if� your� mind� starts� with� multiple� ideas� in� parallel,� it� is� not
prematurely�committed�to�one�path�and�stays�more�open�and�able�to�receive�and
conceive�more�novel�innovations.�Designers�have�known�this�all�along—you�don’t
want�to�start�with�just�one�idea,�or�you’re�likely�to�get�stuck�with�it.
Try�not�to�think�of�your�Odyssey�Plans�as�“Plan�A,�Plan�B,�and�Plan�C”—where
A�is�the�really�good�plan�and�B�is�the�okay�plan�and�C�is�the�plan�that�you�really
hope�you�don’t�get�stuck�with�but�that�you�would�accept�as�tolerable�if�absolutely
necessary.�Every�Odyssey�Plan�is�a�Plan�A,�because�it’s�really�you�and�it’s�really
possible.� Odyssey� Plans� are� sketches� of� possibilities� that� can� animate� your
imagination� and� help� you� choose� which� wayfinding� direction� you� will� actually
take�to�start�prototyping�and�living�into�next.
Don’t� worry� about� choosing� which� alternative� life� you� are� going� to� live.� We
have�great�ideas�and�tools�for�the�difficult�task�of�“choosing,”�and�we’ll�discuss
them�in�chapter�9.�Criteria�for�choosing�what’s�next�may�be�based�on�available
resources�(proximity,�time,�money),�coherence�(how�the�alternative�fits�into�your
Lifeview�and�Workview),�your�confidence�level�(do�you�believe�you�can�do�this?),
and� how� much� you� like� it.� But� first� things� first.� You� need� to� develop� the
alternatives.
So�Many�Lives,�So�Little�Time
We� call� these� Odyssey� Plans� because� life� is� an� odyssey—an� adventurous� journey
into�the�future�with�hopes�and�goals,�helpers,�lovers�and�antagonists,�unknowns
and�serendipities,�all�unfolding�over�time�in�a�way�we�both�intend�at�the�start�and
weave�together�as�we�go.�Homer2�told�the�ancient�story�of�Odysseus�as�a�metaphor
for�this�life-as-adventure.�So�we�want�to�take�the�time�now�to�imagine�multiple
ways�you�could�launch�the�next�chapter�of�your�life’s�journey—your�quest.
We�want�you�to�create�three�very�different�plans�for�the�next�five�years�of�your
life.� Why� five� years?� Because� two� years� is� too� short� (makes� us� nervous� that� we
haven’t�thought�far�enough�ahead)�and�seven�years�is�too�long�(we�know�stuff�is
going�to�happen�to�change�things�by�then).�In�fact,�if�you�listen�to�people�tell�their
stories,�most�people’s�lives�are�actually�lived�as�a�series�of�two-to-four-year�seasons
strung�together.�Even�important�longer�periods�(the�child-rearing�years)�are�broken
into�substantially�distinct�two-to-four-year�chunks—the�toddler�years,�the�preschool
years,�the�tween�years,�the�years�when�they�don’t�speak�to�you,�also�called�the�teen
years.�Five�years�cover�one�good�four-year�chunk�with�an�extra�year�of�buffer�time.
After�doing�this�exercise�many�different�ways�and�thousands�of�times�with�people
of�all�ages,�we’re�confident�five�years�is�about�right.�Just�try�it.
We�want�to�insist�(since�we�won’t�be�grading�your�homework)�that�you�create
three�very�different�alternative�versions�of�you.�Three�plans�give�you�real�choices�(a
list�of�three�feels�much�longer�than�a�list�of�two),�and�will�stretch�your�creative
muscles�hard�enough�that�you’ll�know�you�didn’t�just�opt�for�the�obvious�answer.
We� want� you� to� come� up� with� three� truly� different� alternatives—not� three
variations�on�a�theme.�Living�in�a�commune�in�Vermont�and�living�in�a�kibbutz�in
Israel�aren’t�really�two�alternatives;�they’re�two�versions�of�the�same�alternative.�Try
to�come�up�with�three�really�different�ideas.
We� know� you� can� do� this� because� we’ve� seen� thousands� of� people� do� it
successfully,� including� lots� of� people� who� started� out� convinced� they� couldn’t
possibly�come�up�with�three�alternative�ideas�about�what�life�they�might�live.�If
you’re�one�of�those�people,�here’s�a�way�to�quickly�come�up�with�“three�versions�of
my�life.”
Life�One—That�Thing�You�Do.�Your�first�plan�is�centered�on�what�you’ve�already�got
in�mind—either�your�current�life�expanded�forward�or�that�hot�idea�you’ve�been
nursing�for�some�time.�This�is�the�idea�you�already�have—it’s�a�good�one�and�it
deserves�attention�in�this�exercise.
Life� Two—That� Thing� You’d� Do� If� Thing� One� Were� Suddenly� Gone.� It� happens.� Some
kinds� of� work� come� to� an� end.� Almost� no� one� makes� buggy� whips� or� Internet
browsers�anymore.�The�former�are�out�of�date�and�the�latter�are�given�away�free
with� your� operating� system,� so� buggy� whips� and� browsers� don’t� make� for� hot
careers.� Just� imagine� that� your� life� one� idea� is� suddenly� over� or� no� longer� an
option.�What�would�you�do?�You�can’t�not�make�a�living.�You�can’t�do�nothing.
What�would�you�do?�If�you’re�like�most�people�we�talk�with,�when�you�really�force
your�imagination�to�believe�that�you�have�to�make�a�living�doing�something�other
than�doing�That�Thing�You�Do,�you’ll�come�up�with�something.
Life�Three—The�Thing�You’d�Do�or�the�Life�You’d�Live�If�Money�or�Image�Were�No�Object.�If
you�knew�you�could�make�a�decent�living�at�it�and�you�knew�no�one�would�laugh
at�you�or�think�less�of�you�for�doing�it—what�would�you�do?�We’re�not�saying�you
suddenly�can�make�a�living�doing�this�and�we�can’t�promise�no�one�will�laugh
(though�they�rarely�do),�but�we�are�saying�imagining�this�alternative�can�be�a�very
useful�part�of�your�life�design�exploration.
—
Dave�was�speaking�to�a�young�MBA�student�recently�who�was�convinced�that�he
didn’t�have�three�ideas�about�his�life.
“So�what�are�you�going�to�do?”�Dave�asked�the�young�MBA.
“I�want�to�go�into�management�consulting.”
“Great,�that’s�your�life�one,”�Dave�replied.�“But�guess�what?�All�the�CEOs�in�the
world�just�got�together�and�concluded�that�they�really�hadn’t�been�all�that�helped
by� all� those� billions� of� dollars� spent� on� consulting,� so� they� all� decided� to� stop
buying�any�more.�Consulting�just�died.�What’ll�you�do�now?”
The�MBA�was�shocked.�“What!�No�consulting�at�all?!”
“Nope—none.�You�gotta�do�something�else.�What’s�it�gonna�be?”
“Well,�if�I�couldn’t�do�consulting,�I�guess�I’d�try�to�work�inside�a�big�media
company�working�on�strategy�or�marketing�communications.”
“Great!�That’s�your�life�two!”
When�asked�what�he’d�do�if�money�or�image�were�no�object,�and�after�being
reassured�that�no�one�would�laugh�or�make�fun�of�him,�the�young�man�proposed
his�life�three.
“Well,�I’d�really�like�to�go�into�wine�distribution.�It�always�seemed�a�little�silly,
but�frankly�it�fascinates�me�and�I’d�love�to�try�it.”
“Okay,”�said�Dave,�“there�are�your�three�lives.”
We’ve�run�through�a�similar�dialogue�with�people�who�were�stuck�on�only�one
idea� for� their� lives.� If� you� can’t� come� up� with� three� ideas� quickly,� just� try� this
approach�to�your�life�one,�life�two,�and�life�three,�and�you’ll�probably�find�yourself
getting�more�than�enough�ideas.
Don’t�get�stuck.�Don’t�overthink�it.�But�do�really�do�it.
It’s�an�exercise�that�will�change�your�life.
Literally.
Odyssey�Planning�101
Create�three�alternative�versions�of�the�next�five�years�of�your�life.�Each�one�must
include:
1. A�visual/graphical�timeline.�Include�personal�and�noncareer
events�as�well—do�you�want�to�be�married,�train�to�win�the
CrossFit�Games,�or�learn�how�to�bend�spoons�with�your�mind?
2. A�title�for�each�option�in�the�form�of�a�six-word�headline
describing�the�essence�of�this�alternative.
3. Questions�that�this�alternative�is�asking—preferably�two�or�three.
A�good�designer�asks�questions�to�test�assumptions�and�reveal
new�insights.�In�each�potential�timeline,�you�will�investigate
different�possibilities�and�learn�different�things�about�yourself�and
the�world.�What�kinds�of�things�will�you�want�to�test�and�explore
in�each�alternative�version�of�your�life?
4. A�dashboard�where�you�can�gauge
a. Resources�(Do�you�have�the�objective�resources—time,�money,
skill,�contacts—you�need�to�pull�off�your�plan?)
b. Likability�(Are�you�hot�or�cold�or�warm�about�your�plan?)
c. Confidence�(Are�you�feeling�full�of�confidence,�or�pretty
uncertain�about�pulling�this�off?)
d. Coherence�(Does�the�plan�make�sense�within�itself?�And�is�it
consistent�with�you,�your�Workview,�and�your�Lifeview?)
• Possible�considerations
° Geography—where�will�you�live?
° What�experience/learning�will�you�gain?
° What�are�the�impacts/results�of�choosing�this�alternative?
° What�will�life�look�like?�What�particular�role,�industry,�or
company�do�you�see�yourself�in?
• Other�ideas
° Do�keep�in�mind�things�other�than�career�and�money.�Even
though�those�things�are�important,�if�not�central,�to�the�decisive
direction�of�your�next�few�years,�there�are�other�critical
elements�that�you�want�to�pay�attention�to.
° Any�of�the�considerations�listed�above�can�be�a�springboard�for
forming�your�alternative�lives�for�the�next�five�years.�If�you�find
yourself�stuck,�try�making�a�mind�map�out�of�any�of�the�design
considerations�listed�above.�Don’t�overthink�this�exercise,�and
don’t�skip�it.
For�all�of�us,�Odyssey�Plans�can�define�important�things�still�to�do�in�our�lives,
and� help� us� remember� dreams� we� may� have� forgotten.� That� twelve-year-old
astronaut� you� once� were� is� still� there.� Be� curious� about� what� else� you� might
discover.�Try�making�at�least�one�of�these�plans�at�least�a�little�bit�wild.�Even�if�it’s
something� you� would� never� do� in� your� right� mind,� write� down� your� most� far-
fetched�and�crazy�idea.�Maybe�it’s�giving�up�all�your�worldly�possessions�and�living
off�the�grid�in�Alaska�or�India.�Maybe�it’s�taking�acting�classes�and�trying�to�make
it�in�Hollywood.�Perhaps�it’s�becoming�an�expert�skateboarder�or�devoting�your
life�to�adrenaline-producing�extreme�sports.�Or�maybe�it’s�hunting�down�that�long-
lost�great-uncle�and�filling�in�the�gaps�of�your�family�story.�You�may�want�to�do
different�alternative�plans�for�different�areas�of�your�life:�alternatives�for�career,�for
love,�for�health,�or�for�play.�Or�you�may�want�to�combine�these�elements.�The�only
wrong�way�to�do�this�is�to�not�do�it�at�all.
Martha’s�Many�Lives
What�follows�is�an�example�of�three�five-year�Odyssey�Plans�from�a�participant�in
one� of� our� Mid-Career� Workshops.� Martha� is� a� technology� executive� who� was
looking�to�try�something�more�meaningful�for�the�latter�half�of�her�life.�She�came
up� with� three� very� different� plans� for� her� future,� each� a� little� more� risky� and
innovative,�but�all�involving�some�kind�of�community�building.
Her�three�plans�were:�doing�her�first�Silicon�Valley–style�start-up,�becoming�the
CEO� of� a� nonprofit� working� with� at-risk� kids,�and� opening�a� fun�and� friendly
neighborhood� bar� in� the� Haight-Ashbury� district� of� San� Francisco,� where� she
lived.�Note�that�each�example�has�a�six-word�headline�describing�the�plan,�a�four-
gauge� dashboard� (we� really� like� dashboards),� and� the� three� questions� that� this
particular�alternative�plan�is�asking.
Example�1
Title:�“All�In—The�Silicon�Valley�Story”
Questions
1. “Do�I�have�what�it�takes�to�be�an�entrepreneur?”
2. “Is�my�idea�good�enough?”
3. “Will�I�be�able�to�raise�venture�capital�money?”
Example�2
Title:�“Using�What�I�Know—Helping�Kids!”
Questions
1. “Will�my�skills�translate�to�the�nonprofit�world?”
2. “Can�I�really�help�at-risk�kids�with�a�nonprofit?”
3. “Will�this�be�meaningful?”
Example�3
Title:�“Creating�Community—One�Drink�at�a�Time!”
Questions:
1. “Am�I�ready�to�take�this�much�risk?”
2. “Can�I�really�create�true�community�with�a�bar?”
3. “Will�this�be�profitable?”
Odyssey�Plan�Exercise
Now�complete�three�alternative�five-year�plans�of�your�own,�one�on�each�of�the
three�worksheets�here�or�downloadable�at�www.designingyour.life.
Sharing�the�Three�Versions�of�You
We’re�going�to�ask�you�to�share�your�Odyssey�Plan�alternatives.�Don’t�freak�out.
There�is�huge�magic�in�having�three�versions�of�you.�Mostly,�it�helps�you�realize
that� there� isn’t� a� single� right� answer� to� what’s� next� for� you.� Consider� which
alternative�rates�high�on�resources,�likability,�confidence,�and�coherence.�Which
version�of�you�gives�you�that�jazzy,�feel-good,�light-my-fire�kind�of�feeling?�Which
version�feels�draining?
The�best�way�to�interact�with�your�alternatives�is�to�share�them�aloud�with�a
group�of�friends—ideally,�with�your�Life�Design�Team�(see�chapter�11�for�more�on
team� and� community)� or� the� group� you� are� reading� this� book� with,� as� we
suggested�in�the�introduction.�The�most�fun�and�effective�way�to�go�through�the
life�design�process�is�to�do�it�in�a�group�of�three�to�six�people,�including�yourself,
who�meet�as�a�team.�It�can�work�fine�if�the�only�person�doing�life�design�is�you,
but� a� group� is� highly� preferable,� with� everyone� both� doing� the� work� and
supporting�the�others’�life�designs.�It�may�be�easier�than�you�think�to�find�two�to
five�other�people�willing�to�do�this�with�you.�Just�give�the�book�away�to�a�few
likely� suspects,� get� together� to� discuss� it,� and� see� what� you� find.� You� may� be
surprised.�And�we’re�not�just�trying�to�get�you�to�buy�more�books�(though�our
publisher� would� be� pleased� if� you� did!)—it’s� just� an� easy� way� to� start� the
conversation.
In�any�event,�whether�you�form�a�Life�Design�Team�that�meets�regularly�or�not,
you’ll�want�to�present�your�Odyssey�Plans�to�a�group�of�supporters�to�get�feedback
and�ideas.�You�want�to�invite�people�who�will�ask�good�questions�but�not�offer
critiques�or�unwanted�advice.�The�ground�rules�for�listening�are�these:�Tell�your
listeners�not�to�critique,�review,�or�advise.�You�want�them�to�receive,�reflect,�and
amplify.�Find�two�to�five�people�who�are�“there�for�you”�and�will�show�up�for�an
evening�dedicated�to�helping�you�design�your�life�(or�who�are�willing�to�read�this
chapter,�at�the�very�least).�When�it’s�time�for�questions,�“Tell�me�more�about…”�is�a
great�approach�that�keeps�the�inquiry�supportive.�If�you�really�don’t�want�to�or
can’t� find� a� group� to� share� with,� then� video� yourself� presenting� your� Odyssey
Plans�and�watch�and�listen�to�yourself�as�though�you�weren’t�the�author;�then�see
what�you�have�to�say�to�yourself�and�jot�down�your�ideas.
Life�design�is�about�generating�options,�and�this�exercise�of�designing�multiple
lives�will�guide�you�in�whatever’s�next�for�you.�You�aren’t�designing�the�rest�of
your� life;� you� are� designing� what’s� next.� Every� possible� version� of� you� holds
unknowns� and� compromises,� each� with� its� own� identifiable� and� unintended
consequences.�You�are�not�so�much�finding�answers�in�this�exercise�as�learning�to
embrace�and�explore�the�questions,�and�be�curious�about�the�possibilities.
Remember,�there�are�multiple�great�lives�within�you.
You�are�legion.
And�you�get�to�choose�which�prototype�to�start�working�on�next.
Try�Stuff
Odyssey�Plan
1. Create�three�alternative�five-year�plans,�using�the�worksheet
provided.
2. Give�each�alternative�a�descriptive�six-word�title,�and�write�down
three�questions�that�arise�out�of�each�version�of�you.
3. Complete�each�gauge�on�the�dashboard—ranking�each�alternative
for�resources,�likability,�confidence,�and�coherence.
4. Present�your�plan�to�another�person,�a�group,�or�your�Life�Design
Team.�Note�how�each�alternative�energizes�you.
6
Prototyping
Clara�needed�to�redesign�her�life.�After�thirty-five�years�of�building�a�successful
career�as�a�sales�executive�in�the�hi-tech�world,�she�was�done.�All�Clara�knew�was
that�she�wanted�a�life�that�didn’t�involve�meeting�a�sales�quota�every�quarter.�In
fact,�she�didn’t�even�want�to�hear�the�words�“sales�quota”�ever�again.�Many�of�her
friends�had�spent�the�last�two�decades�developing�side�interests—hobbies�they�were
turning�into�professions,�creative�interests�they�were�now�pursuing�full-time,�and
volunteer�work�that�gave�them�meaning�and�purpose.�All�her�friends�seemed�to�be
leaving�their�professional�careers�to�pursue�something�else—but�Clara�didn’t�have�a
“something�else.”�She�had�spent�most�of�her�life�raising�children�as�a�single�mom
and�developing�her�career�in�sales.�Her�children�were�adults�now,�her�career�was
coming�to�a�close,�and�Clara�had�no�idea�where�to�begin,�or�what�might�be�next,�so
we�helped�her�start�from�right�where�she�was�and�design�her�way�forward.
Clara’s�friends�had�lots�of�suggestions�for�her,�and�most�of�them�agreed�that�the
important�thing�was�to�“Just�get�going!�If�you�don’t�have�a�good�idea,�then�just
pick�something�and�jump�in.�You’re�too�young�to�quit�now.�Whatever�you�do,
don’t�get�stuck�bored�at�home—just�commit�to�something.”�That�was�easy�advice�for
them�to�give,�since�all�of�them�at�least�knew�how�they�wanted�to�invest�their�time.
Clara�didn’t.�So�where�to�begin?�Clara�made�a�great�decision.�She�recognized�that�it
was�good�advice�to�“do�something,”�but�it�was�bad�advice�to�“jump�in�and�just
commit�to�something”�because�she�could�easily�find�herself�overcommitted�to�the
wrong� thing.� What� she� needed� to� do� was� find� a� way� of� trying� things� out� first
without�committing�herself�to�them�prematurely.�She�wanted�to�test-drive�some
possibilities,�get�some�real�experience,�but�do�it�in�water�up�to�her�knees,�not�over
her�head.
Even�though�she�didn’t�have�a�specific�goal�in�mind�for�what�she’d�later�call�her
encore�career,�Clara�did�have�one�possible�area�of�interest.�She’d�been�one�of�the
first�women�ever�to�sell�mainframe�computers�for�IBM�and�had�long�considered
herself�a�feminist.�She�figured,�“Okay,�that’s�still�an�issue�worth�working�on—let’s
look�for�something�to�do�with�helping�women.”�From�that�moment�on,�she�was
actively� researching� approaches� to� helping� women� and� keeping� her� eye� out� for
things�she�could�try.�A�few�weeks�later,�she�was�at�her�local�church�when�a�woman
was�giving�a�talk�about�mediation�and�nonviolent�communication�and�how�these
techniques�were�being�used�to�help�mothers�with�delinquent�children�and�battered
women�in�abusive�marriages.�Clara�introduced�herself�to�the�woman�and�started
asking�questions�about�her�work.�These�sharp�questions�got�her�invited�to�attend
the�training�class�on�mediation.�It�was�only�a�few�hours�a�week,�and�even�if�she
passed�the�certification�test�at�the�end,�there�was�no�obligation,�so�she�did�it�to�get
some�experience�of�what�it�was�like�to�do�mediation�for�troubled�women.�She�took
the�course�and�got�a�mediation�certificate.
It� turned� out� that� there� was� an� opening� for� a� very� difficult� job,� providing
mediation� services� for� youth� in� the� juvenile� justice� system.� The� position� was
funded� only� through� the� calendar� year,� so� they� couldn’t� promise� how� long� it
would�last,�but�that�was�fine�for�Clara.�She�would�be�mediating�among�the�courts,
the� schools,� the� parents,� and� the� kids,� and� coming� up� with� an� alternative� to
incarceration�for�at-risk�children.�It�was�a�hard�place�to�start,�but�Clara�found�that
her�decades�of�dealing�with�difficult�salespeople�in�the�hi-tech�world�made�her�a
natural�negotiator�and�problem�solver.�Also,�many�of�the�juvenile�offenders�had
single�moms,�and�she�had�a�special�place�in�her�heart�for�other�struggling�single
mothers.� Clara� found� the� offer� surprisingly� attractive.� She� was� ready� to� try� it—
though�just�part-time,�and�just�until�the�end�of�the�year.�She�was�still�exploring.
Clara� continued� searching� for� ways� to� get� involved� in� women’s� issues,� and
discovered� the� Women’s� Foundation� of� California� (WFC).� WFC� didn’t� do
anything�on�its�own—it�funded�other�nonprofits�that�were�geared�toward�a�wide
range�of�social�justice�issues�related�to�women.�It�was�a�vantage�point�for�her�“try
stuff� out”� exploration� project,� so� she� reached� out� to� the� organization.� Clara’s
mediation� work� impressed� the� WFC� leadership,� and� she� was� invited� to� join.
During�the�course�of�the�three�years�she�spent�serving�this�foundation,�she�learned
about�grant�writing�and�nonprofit�funding,�and�she�also�learned�a�great�deal�about
twenty-seven�different�nonprofits�that�were�hard�at�work�solving�social�problems
in�her�region.
Along�the�way,�Clara�found�that�she�was�not�drawn�to�staying�involved�in�the
legal�system�as�a�mediator�(as�important�as�that�work�was),�but�she�was�increasingly
drawn�to�the�issue�of�homelessness,�which�hits�women�especially�hard.�Through
WFC,�she�met�a�philanthropist�who�was�the�largest�benefactor�for�the�homeless
shelter� in� her� hometown.� He� asked� Clara� to� become� a� member� of� the� shelter’s
board�of�directors,�and�it�was�at�that�moment�that�she�realized�she’d�found�her
encore� career.� She� took� his� offer� and� dropped� everything� else.� She� is� now� a
champion� for� the� homeless� in� her� city,� and� is� pioneering� a� model� to� solve
homelessness�locally�and�nationally.
Clara�didn’t�start�out�with�a�plan�to�work�for�the�homeless.�Knowing�that�she
hadn’t�found�a�specific�mission�to�direct�her�steps,�she�carefully�and�thoughtfully
crafted�a�series�of�small�but�illustrative�experiences�and�involvements�to�design�her
way�forward.�Her�path�to�“homeless�champion”�(which,�by�the�way,�has�become
her� passion)� was� not� a� straight� line,� by� any� means.� She� designed� the� life� she� is
living,�step�by�step,�by�thinking�like�a�designer�and�building�her�way�forward�by
doing� small� experiments—prototypes.� She� trusted� that� if� she� kept� giving� herself
carefully�selected�hands-on�encounters,�she’d�find�her�way.
She�took�a�class�on�mediation.�She�took�the�job�in�the�juvenile�justice�system.
She�joined�the�women’s�foundation.�She�learned�about�the�world�of�nonprofits.
She�got�involved�in�the�board�for�the�homeless�center.�By�doing�the�work,�meeting
the�people,�and�choosing�to�explore�her�options�through�hands-on�experience,�and
not�just�spending�her�time�reading,�thinking,�or�reflecting�in�her�journal�about
what� she� should� or� could� do� next,� Clara� found� her� encore� career.� It� was� only
through�life�design�that�she�was�able�to�discover�a�future�that�had�been�not�only
unknowable,�but�also�unimaginable.�Clara�did�it,�and�you�can,�too.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�If�I�comprehensively�research�the�best�data�for�all�aspects
of�my�plan,�I’ll�be�fine.
Reframe:�I�should�build�prototypes�to�explore�questions�about�my�alternatives.
Prototyping—Why�and�How
“Building�is�thinking”�is�a�phrase�you�will�often�hear�around�the�Design�Program
at�Stanford.�When�that�idea�is�coupled�with�the�bias-to-action�mind-set,�you�get�a
lot�of�building�and�thinking.�If�you�ask�people�what�they�are�doing,�they�will�tell
you� that� they� are� building� prototypes.� They� might� be� prototyping� new� product
ideas,�new�consumer�experiences,�or�new�services.�At�Stanford,�we�believe�anything
can�be�prototyped,�from�a�physical�object�to�public�policy.�Prototyping�is�such�an
integral�part�of�design�thinking�that�it�might�be�worthwhile�to�step�back�a�little
and�make�sure�that�the�“why”�of�prototyping�is�as�well�understood�as�the�“how.”
When�you�are�trying�to�solve�a�problem,�any�problem,�you�typically�start�with
what�you�know�about�the�problem:�you�start�with�the�data.�You�need�enough�data
so�that�you�can�understand�what�causes�what,�and�what�is�likely�to�happen�when
something�else�happens.
Unfortunately,�when�you�are�designing�your�life,�you�don’t�have�a�lot�of�data
available,�especially�reliable�data�about�your�future.�You�have�to�accept�that�this�is
the�kind� of�messy� problem�in�which� traditional�cause-and-effect� thinking� won’t
work.�Luckily,�designers�have�come�up�with�a�way�of�sneaking�up�on�the�future
through�prototyping.
When� we� use� the� term� “prototyping”� in� design� thinking,� we� do� not� mean
making� something� to� check� whether� your� solution� is� right.� We� don’t� mean
creating�a�representation�of�a�completed�design,�nor�do�we�mean�making�just�one
thing�(designers�make�lots�of�prototypes—never�just�a�prototype).�Prototyping�the�life
design� way� is� all� about� asking� good� questions,� outing� our� hidden� biases� and
assumptions,�iterating�rapidly,�and�creating�momentum�for�a�path�we’d�like�to�try
out.
Prototypes� should� be� designed� to� ask� a� question� and� get� some� data� about
something� that� you’re� interested� in.� Good� prototypes� isolate� one� aspect� of� a
problem�and�design�an�experience�that�allows�you�to�“try�out”�some�version�of�a
potentially�interesting�future.�Prototypes�help�you�visualize�alternatives�in�a�very
experiential� way.� That� allows� you� to� imagine� your� future� as� if� you� are� already
living� it.� Creating� new� experiences� through� prototyping� will� give� you� an
opportunity�to�understand�what�a�new�career�path�might�feel�like,�even�if�only�for
an�hour�or�a�day.�And�prototyping�helps�you�involve�others�early�and�helps�build
a� community� of� folks� who� are� interested� in� your� journey� and� your� life� design.
Prototypes�are�a�great�way�to�start�a�conversation,�and,�more�often�than�not,�one
thing� typically� leads� to� another.� Prototypes� frequently� turn� into� unexpected
opportunities—they�help�serendipity�happen.�Finally,�prototypes�allow�you�to�try
and�fail�rapidly�without�overinvesting�in�a�path�before�you�have�any�data.
Our� philosophy� is� that� it� is� always� possible� to� prototype� something� you� are
interested�in.�The�best�way�to�get�started�is�to�keep�your�first�few�prototypes�very
low-resolution� and� very� simple.� You� want� to� isolate� one� variable� and� design� a
prototype�to�answer�that�one�question.�Use�what�you�have�available�or�can�ask�for,
and� be� prepared� to� iterate� quickly.� And� remember� that� a� prototype� is� not� a
thought�experiment;�it�must�involve�a�physical�experience�in�the�world.�The�data
to�make�good�decisions�are�found�in�the�real�world,�and�prototyping�is�the�best
way�to�engage�that�world�and�get�the�data�you�need�to�move�forward.
Prototyping� is� also� about� building� empathy� and� understanding.� Our
prototyping� process� inevitably� requires� collaboration,� working� with� others.
Everyone�is�on�a�journey,�and�your�prototype�encounters�with�others�will�reveal
their�life�designs�and�give�you�ideas�for�your�own�life.
So—we� prototype� to� ask� good� questions,� create� experiences,� reveal� our
assumptions,�fail�fast,�fail�forward,�sneak�up�on�the�future,�and�build�empathy�for
ourselves�and�others.�Once�you�accept�that�this�is�really�the�only�way�to�get�the
data�you�need,�prototyping�becomes�an�integral�part�of�your�life�design�process.
Not�only�is�it�true�that�doing�prototyping�is�a�good�idea;�it’s�equally�true�that�not
prototyping�is�a�bad�and�sometimes�very�costly�idea.
Slow�and�Steady
Elise�didn’t�need�to�prototype—she�was�ready�to�go.�After�spending�years�working
in�human�resource�departments�in�large�corporations,�Elise�was�ready�for�a�change.
A� big� change.� Now.� She� loved� food,� especially� Italian� food,� and� she� loved� the
experiences�she’d�had�in�small�cafés�and�deli�markets�in�Tuscany.�It�was�her�dream
to�run�a�great�Italian�deli�with�a�small�café�inside�that�served�wonderful�coffee�and
authentic� Tuscan� food.� She� decided� to� go� for� it.� She� had� saved� enough� to� get
started,� collected� all� the� recipes� she� needed,� researched� the� best� place� near� her
home�to�locate�such�a�business,�and�did�it.�She�rented�a�place,�totally�renovated�it,
stocked�it�with�the�best�products,�and�opened�to�great�fanfare.�It�was�an�immense
amount�of�work,�and�it�was�a�roaring�success.�Everyone�loved�it.�She�was�busier
than�ever.�And�in�no�time�she�was�miserable.
She�hadn’t�prototyped�her�idea�at�all.�She�didn’t�sneak�up�on�her�future.�She
jumped�out�of�the�plane�right�into�it.�She�hadn’t�tried�out�what�it�was�like�working
in�a�café,�day�in�and�day�out.�She�hadn’t�discovered�that�she�had�assumed�that
running�a�café�was�the�same�as�going�to�a�café�or�planning�a�café.�She�learned�the
hard�way�that�she’s�a�great�café�designer�and�renovation�project�manager,�and�a
lousy� deli� manager.� She� didn’t� enjoy� hiring� staff� (over� and� over),� or� tracking
inventory,�or�ordering�new�stock,�and�don’t�even�ask�about�the�maintenance.�She
was�stuck�with�this�successful�store�and�didn’t�know�what�to�do.�Eventually,�she
sold�it�and�went�into�restaurant�interior�design,�but�she�got�there�by�a�very�painful
path.
How�could�she�have�prototyped�her�idea?�She�could�have�tried�catering�first—an
easy�business�to�start�up�and�shut�down�(no�rent,�few�employees,�super-portable,
no�regular�hours).�She�could�have�gotten�a�job�bussing�tables�at�an�Italian�deli�to
have�a�good�look�at�the�dirty�end�of�the�job,�not�just�the�sexy�menu�planning.�She
could� have� interviewed� three� happy� and� three� grumpy� deli-café� owners� to� learn
which�group�she�was�more�like.�We�met�Elise�after�it�was�all�over.�We�heard�her
story�when�she�was�taking�a�Life�Design�Workshop�with�us.�After�the�workshop
she�lamented,�“Gosh,�if�only�I’d�taken�the�slow�path�of�prototyping�first,�I’d�have
saved�myself�so�much�time!”�So,�yes,�even�if�you’re�in�a�rush,�we�recommend�you
prototype� your� life� ideas.� You’ll� get� a� better� design� and� save� a� lot� of� time� and
difficulty.
Prototype�Conversations—Life�Design�Interview
Once�you’ve�committed�yourself�to�life�design�prototyping,�how�do�you�do�it?�The
simplest�and�easiest�form�of�prototyping�is�a�conversation.�We’re�going�to�describe
a�specific�form�of�prototype�conversation�that�we�call�a�Life�Design�Interview.
A�Life�Design�Interview�is�incredibly�simple.�It�just�means�getting�someone’s
story.� Not� just� anyone� and� not� just� any� story,� of� course.� You� want� to� talk� to
someone�who�is�either�doing�and�living�what�you’re�contemplating,�or�has�real
experience�and�expertise�in�an�area�about�which�you�have�questions.�And�the�story
you’re�after�is�the�personal�story�of�how�that�person�got�to�be�doing�that�thing�he
or�she�does,�or�got�the�expertise�he�has�and�what�it’s�really�like�to�do�what�she
does.
You�want�to�hear�what�the�person�who�does�what�you�might�someday�want�to
do�loves�and�hates�about�his�job.�You�want�to�know�what�her�days�look�like,�and
then�you�want�to�see�if�you�can�imagine�yourself�doing�that�job—and�loving�it—for
months�and�years�on�end.�In�addition�to�asking�people�about�their�work�and�life,
you�will�also�be�able�to�find�out�how�they�got�there—their�career�path.�Most�people
fail�not�for�lack�of�talent�but�for�lack�of�imagination.�You�can�get�a�lot�of�this
information�by�sitting�down�with�someone�and�getting�his�or�her�story.�That’s�Life
Design�Interviewing.�Clara�had�lots�of�these�conversations,�and�they�really�helped
her.�Elise�had�almost�none,�and�it�really�cost�her.
The� first� thing� to� know� about� a� Life� Design� Interview� is� what� it’s� not—a� job
interview.�If�you�find�yourself�in�the�middle�of�a�Life�Design�Interview�and�you’re
answering�questions�or�talking�about�yourself�rather�than�getting�the�story�of�the
person�you’re�with,�stop�and�flip�it�around.�This�is�critical.�If�the�person�you’re�in
conversation� with� misperceives� that� your� meeting� is� a� job� interview,� then� it’s� a
disaster,�and�your�Life�Design�Interview�has�failed�or�will�fail.�It’s�all�about�mind-
sets.�Think�about�it:�When�someone�thinks�you’re�looking�for�a�job,�the�first�thing
on�his�or�her�mind�actually�has�nothing�to�do�with�you�at�all.�He�is�thinking,�“Do
we�have�a�job�opening�to�discuss?”�The�answer�to�that�is�usually�no.�So�most�of�the
time�you’re�trying�to�get�a�meeting�and�the�other�person�thinks�you’re�looking�for
a�job,�you�don’t�get�the�appointment.�You�just�get�“No.”�It�may�seem�like�a�harsh
and� presumptuous� rejection,� but� it’s� actually� the� kindest� and� most� supportive
thing� that� person� can� do.� If� in� fact� you� are� looking� for� a� job� and� that� person
hasn’t�got�one�to�give�or�isn’t�influential�in�the�hiring�process,�the�best�thing�she
can�do�for�you�is�tell�you�so�and�free�you�to�go�find�someone�with�an�opening�who
can�actually�be�helpful�to�you.�It�doesn’t�feel�like�an�act�of�kindness�(and�most
people�deliver�a�rejection�poorly),�but�that�is�what’s�actually�happening.
If�it�turns�out�the�answer�to�that�first�question�is�“Yes,�we�do�have�an�opening
available,”�then�the�second�question�is�“Does�she�fit�here?”�The�mind-set�of�a�job
interview�is�critique�and�judgment,�and�that�is�not�the�mind-set�we’re�looking�for�if
we�are�after�an�interesting�story�and�a�personal�connection.
In� fact,� a� Life� Design� Interview� isn’t� an� “interview”� at� all—it’s� really� just� a
conversation.�So,�when�trying�to�get�a�meeting�with�someone,�you�don’t�use�the
term�“interview,”�because�that�person�will�assume�you�mean�a�job�interview�(unless
you’re�a�journalist,�and�that�will�make�him�even�more�nervous,�for�other�reasons).
All� you’re� doing� here� is� identifying� people� who� are� currently� doing� things� that
you’re�interested�in�and�whose�stories�you�want�to�get.�This�is�way�easier�than�you
think.� As� soon� as� you’ve� determined� that� Anna� is� a� cool� person� doing� really
interesting�work,�you�and�Anna�have�something�in�common—you�both�think�that
she�and�what�she’s�doing�are�two�of�your�favorite�topics!�The�essence�of�the�request
for�a�meeting�to�have�this�conversation�is:�“Hello,�Anna,�I’m�so�glad�to�connect
with� you.� John� said� you� were� just� the� person� I� needed� to� speak� with.� I’m� very
impressed�with�what�I�know�of�your�work,�and�I’d�love�to�hear�some�of�your�story.
Might�you�have�thirty�minutes�to�spare,�at�a�time�and�place�convenient�to�you,
when�I�can�buy�you�a�cup�of�coffee�and�hear�more�about�your�experience?”�That’s
about�it—really.�(And,�yes,�it’s�important�to�mention�Anna’s�respected�friend�or
colleague� John� if� at� all� possible.� John� is� the� guy� whose� referral� made� all� the
difference�in�your�finding�Anna,�and�in�her�being�more�inclined�to�accept�your
request�for�coffee.�There�are�lots�of�Annas�in�the�world�who�will�have�coffee�with
you�even�if�you�weren’t�referred�by�John,�but�it�works�a�lot�better�if�you�can�get
that� referral.� We’ll� talk� about� how� to� get� referrals� in� chapter� 8.� It’s� called
networking.�Yes,�you�have�to�network�to�do�life�design�effectively,�but�more�on
that�later.)
Prototype�Experiences
Prototype�conversations�are�great;�they’re�incredibly�informative�and�easy�to�come
by.�But�you’re�going�to�want�more�than�just�stories�as�input�for�coming�up�with
your� life� design.� You� want� actually� to� experience� what� “it”� is� really� like—by
watching� others� do� it� or,� better� yet,� doing� some� form� of� it� yourself.� Prototype
experiences� allow� us� to� learn� through� a� direct� encounter� with� a� possible� future
version�of�us.�This�experiential�version�could�involve�spending�a�day�shadowing�a
professional�you’d�like�to�be�(Take�a�Friend�to�Work�Day),�or�a�one-week�unpaid
exploratory� project� that� you� create,� or� a� three-month� internship� (obviously,� a
three-month� internship� requires� more� investment� and� a� larger� commitment).� If
you’ve� conducted� a� good� number� of� prototype� conversations� using� Life� Design
Interviewing,� then� you� will� have� met� people� along� the� way� who� you� may� be
interested�in�observing�or�shadowing.�So�that�variety�of�prototype�should�be�pretty
accessible� for� you.� You� just� have� to� ask—and� remember,� people� enjoy� being
helpful.� Most� people� we� work� with� are� surprised� how� well� their� Life� Design
Interviews�go.�The�people�they�meet�with�really�seem�to�enjoy�it.�Asking�to�shadow
someone�at�work�is�a�much�bigger�favor�than�a�thirty-minute�cup�of�coffee,�but
after� a� dozen� or� so� prototype� conversations,� you’ll� be� ready� to� make� a� bigger
request.�Try�it—even�if�you�have�to�try�a�few�times.�You’ll�learn�a�great�deal.
Coming�up�with�hands-on�prototype�experiences,�in�which�you�actually�get�to
do�stuff�and�not�just�hear�about�stuff�or�watch�stuff,�is�an�even�bigger�challenge.�But
it’s�well�worth�the�effort�to�get�your�hands�dirty�and�really�discover�how�something
fits�you.�You�wouldn’t�buy�a�car�without�a�test�drive,�would�you?�But�we�do�this�all
the�time�with�jobs�and�life�changes.�It’s�crazy,�when�you�think�about�it.�Remember
all� the� ideas� we� had� that� Elise� could� have� tried� before� she� actually� bought� and
opened�a�deli—things�like�catering�a�few�times�or�taking�a�short-term�job�bussing
tables?� Those� are� the� sorts� of� ideas� you’re� looking� for.� Conceiving� prototype
experiences�like�this�is�real�design�work�and�is�going�to�require�having�lots�of�ideas.
So�this�is�a�great�time�to�introduce�design�brainstorming—a�collaborative�technique
for�finding�lots�of�ideas.�Here�we�go.
Brainstorming�Prototype�Experiences
Look�back�at�the�Odyssey�Plans�you�made�in�the�previous�chapter.�We�hope�these
sparked�some�future�versions�of�you�that�you’d�like�to�explore,�and�that�you�now
have�questions�that�need�answers.�What’s�it�like�working�in�a�small�company�after
all�these�years�at�Huge,�Inc.?�How�is�managing�an�organic�farm�full-time�different
from�spending�a�summer�WOOFing�(working�on�an�organic�farm�as�a�volunteer)?
What�do�salespeople�actually�do�all�day,�anyway?�Take�a�closer�look�at�whatever
version�of�your�Odyssey�Plans�was�coherent,�likable,�and�exciting,�and�that�you’re
somewhat�confident�you�could�do.�What�are�your�questions?�What�would�you�like
to�understand�better�by�prototyping�the�experience?
This�is�the�challenge�we’re�going�to�address�by�brainstorming�some�prototypable
ideas.
Just�about�everyone�has�done�something�called�“brainstorming”�before.�This�is
one� of� those� often� used� and� much-abused� words� that� can� be� used� to� describe
anything�from�a�structured�creativity�exercise�to�just�sitting�in�a�room�and�tossing
around�ideas.�Brainstorming,�a�technique�for�generating�lots�of�creative�and�out-of-
the-box� ideas,� was� first� described� by� Alex� Osborn� in� a� book� published� in� 1953
called�Applied�Imagination.�He�described�a�method�of�generating�ideas�that�relied
on�two�rules:�generating�a�large�quantity�of�ideas�without�concern�for�quality,�and
deferring�judgment�so�that�participants�would�not�censor�ideas.�Since�this�early
description,� brainstorming� has� become� a� popular� way� of� generating� ideas� and
innovations�and�has�taken�on�many�forms,�but�all�still�obey�Osborn’s�two�rules.
The� most� common� form� is� group� brainstorming.� A� group� of� individuals,
typically�four�to�six,�get�together,�select�a�focal�question�or�problem�on�which�to
brainstorm,�and�then�spend�a�period�of�twenty�minutes�to�an�hour�generating�as
many�ideas�as�possible�to�solve�the�problem�posed�in�the�focal�question.�The�goal
is�to�come�up�with�ideas�that�can�be�prototyped�and�tried�in�the�real�world.
Brainstorming�requires�a�group�of�people�who�want�to�be�helpful�and�who�have
some� practice� with� the� technique.� It� isn’t� easy� to� find� good� brainstormers,� but
once�you�have�a�good�group,�you�can�make�a�lot�of�progress�generating�life�design
ideas�that�you�want�to�prototype.�Like�great�improvisational�jazz�musicians,�good
brainstormers�learn�to�focus�on�a�topic,�but�they�can�also�let�go,�be�in-the-moment,
and�improvise,�coming�up�with�ideas�that�are�truly�original.�It�takes�practice�and
attention,�but�once�you�master�life�design�brainstorming,�you’ll�never�run�out�of
ideas�again.
Life� design� brainstorming� has� four� steps,� and� a� very� structured� approach� to
coming�up�with�lots�of�prototypable�ideas.�Typically,�if�you�are�the�facilitator�who
brings�the�group�together,�you�might�have�already�framed�the�brainstorming�topic.
You�want�a�team�of�no�fewer�than�three�and�rarely�more�than�six�people�who�have
all� volunteered� to� help.� Once� the� group� is� convened,� the� session� proceeds� as
follows.
1.�Framing�a�Good�Question
It� is� important� to� frame� a� good� question� for� a� brainstorming� session.� The
facilitator�uses�the�process�of�coming�up�with�the�question�as�a�way�to�create�a
focus�for�the�group’s�energy.�When�coming�up�with�the�question,�the�facilitator
needs�to�be�aware�of�some�guidelines.
If�the�question�isn’t�open-ended,�you�won’t�get�very�interesting�results�and�not
much�volume.�We�tend�to�start�all�of�our�life�design�brainstorms�with�the�phrase
“How�many�ways�can�we�think�of�to…”�to�make�sure�that�we�haven’t�limited�our
potential�output.�Clara�could�have�organized�her�brainstorm�around�the�question
“How�many�ways�can�we�think�of�to�experience�making�an�impact�on�women’s
empowerment?”� Before� jumping� into� grad� school,� Chung� could� have� set� up� a
brainstorm�session�asking,�“What�are�the�functions�of�career�counseling,�and�what
encounters�can�we�imagine�to�reveal�what�doing�each�of�them�is�really�like?”
You�also�want�to�be�careful�not�to�include�your�solution�accidentally�in�your
question.� This� happens� all� the� time� with� some� of� Bill’s� clients.� They� want� to
brainstorm�“ten�new�ways�to�make�a�ladder�for�a�stockroom.”�This�isn’t�a�very
good� framing� question,� because� a� ladder� is� a� solution� (and� they� only� want� ten
ideas).�A�better�framing�would�be�to�focus�on�what�a�ladder�does:�“How�many�ways
can�we�think�of�to…give�a�person�access�to�inventory�in�high�places?”�or�“How
many�ways�can�we�think�of�to…give�a�stockperson�three-dimensional�mobility�in�a
warehouse?”�These�questions�do�not�assume�that�ladders�are�the�only�way�to�solve
the�problem,�and�they�open�up�the�solution�space�for�more�creative�answers�(user-
controlled�stockroom�drones,�anyone?).
Also,� be� careful� that� you� don’t� frame� a� question� so� broadly� that� it� is
meaningless.�We�sometimes�sit�in�on�life�design�brainstorms�where�the�question�is
“How�many�ways�can�we�think�of�to…make�Bob�happy?”�This�vague�question�fails
for�a�couple�of�reasons:�First�of�all,�“happiness”�means�too�many�different�things
to� different� people.� And� positive� psychology� tells� us� that� happiness� is� context-
dependent,�so,�without�a�context—such�as�“my�work”�or�“my�social�life”—no�one
knows� where� to� start.� Without� some� constraints,� these� types� of� brainstorming
sessions�tend�to�generate�ideas�that�are�neither�prototypable�nor�satisfying.
Most�of�the�time�when�people�tell�us�“our�brainstorm�didn’t�work,”�we�find�out
that�they�framed�a�poor�question—either�one�that�already�assumed�a�solution�or
one�that�was�so�vague�they�couldn’t�get�any�traction�for�generating�ideas.�Watch
out�for�this�when�you�start�to�brainstorm�with�our�four-step�method.
2.�Warming�Up
People� need� a� transition� from� their� hectic,� event-driven� workday� to� a� state� of
relaxed,�creative�attention�if�they�are�going�to�do�a�good�job�brainstorming.�People
need� some� support� and� a� transitional� activity� to� move� from� their
analytical/critical�brain�to�a�synthesizing/nonjudgmental�brain.�It’s�a�mind-body
problem� and� it� takes� some� practice� to� get� good� at� making� such� a� transition.� A
good�facilitator�takes�the�lead�and�makes�sure�everyone�is�warmed�up�and�feeling
creative.�This�is�essential�if�the�brainstorm�is�going�to�be�high-energy�and�generate
a�lot�of�ideas.
You� can� visit� our� website,� www.designingyour.life,� for� a� list� of� exercises� and
improvisational�games�that�we�use�all�the�time�with�our�students.�Here’s�one�quick
idea�that�always�works:�give�everyone�in�your�brainstorming�group�a�can�of�Play-
Doh.�Bill’s�been�in�love�with�Play-Doh�since�his�days�at�the�toy�company�Kenner
Products;�it�is�a�magic�material�that�turns�adults�into�children�again.�If�you�just�let
your� brainstormers� play� with� the� Play-Doh� while� they� are� brainstorming,� we
guarantee�you�will�get�more�and�better�ideas.
3.�The�Brainstorm�Itself
3.�The�Brainstorm�Itself
As�we�mentioned�at�the�start,�brainstorming�sessions�need�to�be�facilitated.�The
facilitator� sets� up� the� room� and� makes� sure� there� are� pens� and� sticky� notes� or
paper� for� every� participant,� and� that� the� space� is� quiet� and� comfortable.� The
facilitator� also� helps� frame� the� question,� manages� the� warm-up,� makes� sure
everything�that�is�said�is�recorded,�and�manages�the�rules.
We� recommend� that� all� participants� have� their� own� pens� and� notepads� and
write� down� their� ideas.� That� way,� the� group� isn’t� constrained� by� how� fast� the
facilitator�can�record�ideas,�and�there�is�less�chance�of�losing�a�potentially�great
idea.
The�Rules�of�Brainstorming
1. Go�for�quantity,�not�quality.
2. Defer�judgment�and�do�not�censor�ideas.
3. Build�off�the�ideas�of�others.
4. Encourage�wild�ideas.
The�“Go�for�quantity,�not�quality”�rule�helps�set�a�common�goal�for�the�group,
and�it�encourages�a�lot�of�positive�energy.�A�good�brainstorming�team�is�bubbling
with�ideas,�and�there�is�rarely�a�pause�in�the�output.
We�use�the�“Defer�judgment�and�do�not�censor�ideas”�rule�to�make�sure�that�the
brainstorming�session�is�a�safe�place�to�have�any�crazy�idea�that�comes�to�mind.
People�fear�being�judged�as�silly,�and�fear�shuts�down�creativity.�This�rule�helps
make�sure�that�doesn’t�happen.
We�“Build�off�the�ideas�of�others”�in�the�same�way�a�soloist�in�a�jazz�quartet
riffs�off�the�musical�ideas�of�the�soloist�before�him.�We�want�to�use�the�collective
creativity�of�the�group,�and�this�rule�encourages�that�creative�interaction.
We� “Encourage� wild� ideas”� not� because� the� wild� ideas� themselves� are� useful
(they�are�rarely�used�in�the�final�sort),�but�because�we�need�to�break�out�of�the�box
of�typical�thinking.�When�you�go�far�out�of�the�box�and�spend�some�time�in�Crazy
Land,�the�ideas�that�follow�tend�to�be�more�innovative�and�original.�Wild�ideas
often�contain�the�seeds�of�the�most�useful�things�to�prototype.
4.�Naming�and�Framing�the�Outcomes
This�is�perhaps�the�most�important�part�of�a�brainstorm,�and�the�one�activity�that
we�notice�most�groups�leave�out.�They�might�take�a�cell-phone�picture�of�their�wall
full�of�sticky�notes,�high-five�all�around,�and�then�leave.�The�problem�with�this�is
that�the�information�on�the�wall�is�pretty�fragile,�and�if�it�isn’t�processed�right
away,� the� freshness� of� the� ideas� and� their� interconnections� get� lost.� Later,
participants�often�feel�that�nothing�happened,�and�they�can’t�remember�what�the
brainstorm�accomplished.
Ideas�should�be�counted—you�want�to�be�able�to�say,�“We�had�141�ideas.”�Group
similar�ideas�together�by�subject�or�category,�name�those�categories,�and�frame�the
results�with�reference�to�the�original�focal�question.�Every�unique�category�is�given
a� descriptive� and� often� funny� name� that� captures� the� essence� of� that� group� of
ideas.�Then�vote.�Voting�is�important,�and�should�be�done�silently,�so�that�people
aren’t�influencing�one�another.�We�like�to�use�colored�dots�to�cast�votes,�and�we
also�like�to�use�categories�such�as:
• Most�exciting
• The�one�we�wish�we�could�do�if�money�were�no�object
• The�dark�horse—probably�won’t�work,�but�if�it�did…
• Most�likely�to�lead�to�a�great�life
• If�we�could�ignore�the�laws�of�physics…
Once� the� voting� is� complete,� the� selections� are� discussed,� and� potentially
regrouped�and�framed�again;�then�decisions�are�made�on�what�to�prototype�first.
At�the�end�of�our�four-step�process,�the�goal�is�to�say�something�like�“We�had
141�ideas,�we�grouped�those�into�six�categories,�and,�based�on�our�focal�question,
we�selected�eight�killer�ideas�to�prototype;�then�we�prioritized�the�list,�and�our�first
prototype�is…”�Often�it�is�possible�to�back�off�from�one�of�the�wild�ideas�just�a
little�and�turn�it�into�a�great�idea.�Let’s�say�that�Clara’s�brainstorm�had�the�crazy
idea�of�“Meet�with�a�hundred�experienced�donors�to�women-oriented�nonprofits.”
Clara�may�have�felt�that�a�hundred�meetings�were�more�than�she�was�able�to�pull
off,�but�the�idea�of�gaining�access�to�a�large�body�of�experience�and�wisdom�was
attractive—and�prompted�the�derivative�idea�of�looking�for�a�donor�group,�which
is�exactly�what�she�found�in�the�Women’s�Foundation�of�California.
If� you� follow� all� four� steps� and� get� results� like� that,� your� life� design
brainstorming�will�be�more�than�worth�it.�The�brainstorm�will�generate�energy�and
momentum�toward�your�goal�of�coming�up�with�some�prototype�experiences�to
explore.�It�will�also�be�an�exercise�you�can�turn�to�whenever�you�need�some�new
ideas,�some�community�support,�or�just�a�little�more�fun�in�your�life�with�people
you�trust.
A�great�way�to�do�this�would�be�to�combine�your�Odyssey�Plan�presentation
gathering�(discussed�in�chapter�5)�with�a�prototype�experience�brainstorm�session.
Your�collaborators�will�have�a�much�better�time�if�they�are�able�not�only�to�give
you� feedback� but� also� to� contribute� directly� to� your� life� design� with� ideas� and
actionable�prototype�possibilities.
Try�Stuff
Prototyping
1. Review�your�three�Odyssey�Plans�and�the�questions�you�wrote
down�for�each.
2. Make�a�list�of�prototype�conversations�that�might�help�you�answer
these�questions.
3. Make�a�list�of�prototype�experiences�that�might�help�you�answer
these�questions.
4. If�you�are�stuck,�and�if�you�have�gathered�a�good�group,�have�a
brainstorming�session�to�come�up�with�possibilities.�(Don’t�have�a
team?�Try�mind�mapping.)
5. Build�your�prototypes�by�actively�seeking�out�Life�Design
Interviews�and�experiences.
7
How�Not�to�Get�a�Job
Steve�Jobs�and�Bill�Gates�never�wrote�résumés,�went�to�career�fairs,�or�struggled
over�achieving�the�perfect�tone,�in�the�perfect�first�sentence,�of�the�perfect�cover
letter.�Perfection�doesn’t�play�a�role�in�life�design,�and�there�is�certainly�nothing
perfect�about�the�standard�American�model�that�90�percent�of�job�seekers�use�to�go
about�looking�for�a�job—a�technique�that�some�say�has�a�success�rate�of�less�than�5
percent.�That’s�right,�90�percent�of�us�are�using�a�method�that�might�only�work�5
percent�of�the�time.
Kurt� had� just� completed� a� two-year� fellowship� after� getting� his� master’s� in
design�in�our�program�at�Stanford—on�top�of�one�he�already�had�from�Yale�in
sustainable�architecture—when�he�and�his�wife,�Sandy,�discovered�their�first�baby
was�on�the�way.�They�decided�to�relocate�from�Silicon�Valley�to�Atlanta,�Georgia,
to�start�their�family�near�Sandy’s�folks.�Kurt�was�finally�ready�for�all�those�shiny
degrees�to�go�to�work�and�provide�him�a�career�that�he�could�love�and�that�would
pay�the�bills.�Kurt�knew�how�to�think�like�a�designer,�but�when�he�first�arrived�in
Georgia,�he�felt�he�needed�to�prove�to�himself�(and�to�his�wife�and�his�in-laws)�that
he�was�serious�about�landing�a�job—and�fast.�So�he�got�busy.�He�did�his�homework.
He�carefully�found�job�postings�in�the�area�that�fit�his�résumé�well.�He�identified
the�most�viable�openings�and�submitted�thirty-eight�job�applications,�along�with
his�impressive�résumé�and�thirty-eight�individually�crafted�cover�letters.
He�should�have�been�beating�the�recruiters�away�with�a�stick�and�having�more
job�offers�than�he�could�count,�but�it�didn’t�work�that�way.�Out�of�his�thirty-eight
applications,�Kurt�received�terse�rejection�e-mails�from�eight�companies�and�never
heard� anything� at� all� from� the� other� thirty.� Eight� nos� and� thirty� nothings.� No
interviews,� no� offers,� no� follow-up� calls.� He� was� discouraged,� disheartened,� and
more�than� a�little� concerned�about� how� he� was�going�to� support� his� new�baby
when�she�arrived.�And�this�was�a�guy�educated�at�Yale�and�Stanford.�Where�does
that�leave�the�rest�of�us?
Kurt’s�first�approach�is�what�most�people�do—what�we�call�the�standard�model
of�job�seeking.�You�look�for�a�job�listing�on�the�Internet�or�a�corporate�website,
read�the�job�description,�decide�whether�that’s�the�“perfect”�job�for�you,�submit
your�résumé�and�cover�letter,�and�wait�around�for�a�hiring�manager�to�call�you�for
an�interview.�And�you�keep�waiting.
And�waiting.
Still�waiting.
The�problem�is�that�52�percent�of�employers�have�admitted�that�they�respond�to
fewer�than�half�of�the�candidates�that�apply.1
This�standard�model�fails�so�much�of�the�time�because�it�is�a�model�based�on
the�mistaken�idea�that�your�perfect�job�is�out�there�waiting�for�you.
Mining�the�Internet
The� idea� that� somehow� the� Internet� is� the� be-all� and� end-all� when� it� comes� to
looking�for�a�job�has�gotten�a�lot�of�traction,�but�it’s�yet�another�dysfunctional
belief.�This�particular�dysfunctional�belief�leads�to�a�lot�of�frustration,�with�a�side
dish�of�demoralization.
Most�great�jobs—those�that�fall�into�the�dream�job�category—are�never�publicly
listed.�The�most�interesting�start-up�jobs—at�the�companies�that�will�someday�be
the� next� Google� or� Apple—are� not� listed� on� the� Internet� before� they� are� filled.
Companies�with�fewer�than�fifty�employees�and�no�human-resource�departments
are� often� exciting� places� to� work,� but� they� don’t� regularly� post� jobs.� Large
companies�typically�post�their�most�interesting�jobs�internally�only,�invisible�to
most�job�seekers.�Many�other�jobs�are�not�listed�until�an�attempt�has�been�made�to
fill�them�through�word�of�mouth�or�social�networks.�You�don’t�find�the�great�jobs
on�the�Internet.�No�matter�what�your�cousin’s�friend’s�brother�told�you�about�how
he�found�his�job.
When�you�are�job�hunting�on�the�Internet,�it�takes�an�inordinate�amount�of
time�to�craft�a�good�cover�letter,�modify�your�résumé�so�it�fits�a�particular�job
description,� and� manage� and� keep� track� of� dozens� and� dozens� of� online
applications.�And�after�all�that�time�and�hard�work,�all�you�hear�back�is�a�whole�lot
of�silence.�Deafening�silence.�Positive�feedback�is�so�infrequent�with�Internet�job-
hunting�that�an�already�unpleasant�activity�(looking�for�a�job)�gets�even�more�so.
Using� the� Internet� as� your� only� job-finding� method� is� nothing� short� of
masochistic.
We� don’t� recommend� the� Internet� as� your� primary� job-finding� method,� but
there� are� thousands� of� jobs� listed� there� every� week.� If� you� insist� on� trying� to
generate�job�options�by�mining�the�postings�on�the�Internet,�we�have�a�few�insider
tips�for�you�to�improve�the�chances�that�your�Internet�search�will�be�productive.
Understanding�Job�Descriptions
We�have�to�give�the�hiring�managers�of�the�world�some�credit�here;�they�all�have
good�intentions.�It’s�just�that�the�process�doesn’t�work�very�well.�Since�advertising,
interviewing,�and�hiring�are�repeated�hundreds�of�times�a�year�in�average�mid-to-
large-sized�companies,�they�can’t�be�allowed�to�take�too�much�time.�No�one�wants
to� miss� out� on� a� good� candidate,� so� companies� post� jobs� on� the� Internet� with
fairly� generic� descriptions,� looking� for� as� many� applications� as� possible.� And
remember,� all� of� this� hiring� activity� occurs� in� addition� to� the� hiring� manager’s
regular�job�assignment,�so�listing�jobs�accurately�often�doesn’t�get�the�time�and
focused�attention�it�deserves.
How� many� times� have� you� thought,� “My� résumé� is� a� perfect� fit� for� this� job
description!”?� So� you� applied,� only� to� get� nothing� back,� not� even� an
acknowledgment�that�they�have�your�résumé?�If�you�understand�a�couple�of�things
about�this�process�from�an�insider’s�point�of�view,�it�will�make�more�sense�and
hurt�a�little�less.
1. The�job�description�on�the�website�is�typically�not�written�by�the
hiring�manager�or�someone�who�really�understands�the�job.
2. The�job�description�almost�never�captures�what�the�job�actually
requires�for�success.
To�show�you�what�we�mean,�let’s�take�apart�some�components�borrowed�from
or� inspired� by� actual� job� descriptions� that� we� pulled� from� the� Internet.� Most
listings�will�have�two�or�three�sections�that�try�to�describe�what�the�company�is
looking�for.
Section�1:�The�Setup
This�is�the�header�of�the�job�description,�which�often�contains�something�like�this
Company�X�is�looking�for�a�candidate�(for�job�X)�with�the
following:
• Good�written�and�verbal�communication�skills
• Strong�analytical�skills
• Excellent�business�planning�and�reporting�skills
• Highly�motivated�and�creative
• Demonstrated�ability�to�juggle�competing�priorities�and�move
quickly
• Strong�initiative,�bias�for�action,�and�a�meticulously�high�attention
to�detail
• Innovative�and�market-savvy
• A�passion�for�customers
These�job�qualifications�are�so�generic�that�they�really�tell�you�nothing�at�all
about�the�job.�They�are�the�attributes�(not�skills)�of�any�good�employee.�They�are
also�almost�impossible�to�screen�for�by�just�looking�at�a�résumé.
Section�2:�Skills
The�generic�attributes�section�is�typically�followed�by�a�section�with�a�ridiculously
detailed�list�of�very�specific�educational�requirements�and�skills.
Excellent�candidates�for�the�job�will�have�the�following
experience:
• A�bachelor’s,�master’s,�or�Ph.D.�with�ten�years’�experience�(doing
exactly�what�we�do�in�our�company)
• Five�to�ten�years�of�experience�with�(some�obscure�legacy�software
program�that�we�still�use)
• Three�to�five�years�of�experience�with�(some�obscure�job-specific
task�that�only�people�who�work�here�know�how�to�do)
This�part�of� the� job�description� is� always� based� on�the� skills� of� the�previous
jobholder;�it’s�historical.�It�does�not�take�into�account�the�possibility�that�the�job
will�change�in�the�future,�or�that�the�very�specific�knowledge�required�would�be
irrelevant�in�six�months,�when�the�company�changes�from�one�software�platform
to� another.� Nor� does� it� account� for� the� fact� that� office� procedures� and� other
methods�of�operation�constantly�evolve�in�any�healthy,�growing�company.
Section�3:�“What�Makes�the�Candidate�Special”
Wait,� we’re� not� done� yet.� Our� favorite� part� of� job� descriptions� is� where� the
overworked�HR�person�or�office�manager�writing�this�thing�accidentally�decides�to
let�the�truth�sneak�into�the�description�and�adds�qualifications�like
• This�role�is�not�for�the�faint�of�heart,�and�only�those�with�a�proven
and�successful�track�record�should�apply.
We� call� this� the� “You’d� have� to� be� crazy� to� take� this� job”� qualifier.� It� really
means�“This�job�really�sucks,�and�only�people�who�have�a�proven�track�record�of
surviving�sucky�jobs�should�apply.”
• Looking�for:�superheroes�with�the�ability�to�produce�ridiculous
amounts�of�work�on�ludicrously�tight�deadlines.
This�“superhero”�qualifier�should�be�read�as�“This�job�is�impossible,�and�no�one
can�do�it.”
• On�top�of�your�ability�to�create�elegant�and�inspiring�solutions,�you
are�insightful�and�persuasive�when�analyzing�and�discussing
strategies�with�colleagues.
We�call�this�the�“wishful�thinking”�qualifier.�We’ve�never�met�a�job�seeker�who
didn’t�think�he�or�she�was�insightful�and�persuasive,�elegant�and�inspiring.�It’s�nice
that� we� all� think� of� ourselves� this� way,� but� it’s� not� much� help� when� you’re
screening�candidates.
Again,�we�didn’t�make�any�of�this�up.�We�took�these�words�right�off�of�major
corporate�job�websites.�And�we�don’t�think�this�is�a�very�smart�way�for�companies
to�act—it’s�unlikely�that�these�job�descriptions�will�attract�only�the�best-qualified
candidates.�But,�that�said,�there�are�ways�to�improve�your�chances�of�using�Internet
job�listings�to�find�a�job�when�you�know�how�these�things�are�created.
Fit�In�Before�You�Stand�Out
To� get� considered� for� an� interview,� your� résumé� has� to� end� up� on� the� top� of
somebody’s�pile.�So�job�number�one�is�to�“fit�in.”�This�doesn’t�mean�you�should
say�anything�about�yourself�that�isn’t�true.�It�does�mean�that,�if�you�want�to�be
discovered,�you�need�to�describe�yourself�with�the�same�words�that�the�company
uses.� It� also� means� that� you� don’t� want� to� talk� about� your� amazing
multidisciplinary�skill�set�yet—it�will�only�confuse�the�“fit”�evaluation.
Most�mid-to-large-sized�companies�that�use�the�Internet�to�collect�résumés�scan
them�into�an�HR�or�“talent�management”�database.�The�hiring�manager�never�sees
the�original.�Your�résumé�will�be�“discovered”�in�a�keyword�search�of�the�database,
and�the�keywords�used�most�often�come�from�the�job�description.�So,�to�increase
you�chance�of�being�discovered,�use�the�same�words�that�they�used�in�the�first�part
of�the�job�description.
The�specific�skills�that�are�listed�as�required�are�important,�but�often�not�a�deal
maker�or�breaker.�Remember,�their�descriptions�are�written�from�the�point�of�view
of�the�current�job,�not�the�future.�If�you�have�those�specific�skills,�great;�add�them
to�your�résumé,�word�for�word.�If�you�don’t,�list�very�specific�skills�that�are�similar.
Find�ways�to�describe�those�skills�that�might�come�up�in�a�keyword�search�based
on�the�job�description.
Finally,� in� the� “screening� candidates”� phase� of� the� hiring� process,� people� are
looking� for� a� skills� match.� Once� you� get� to� the� interview,� you� have� to� be� very
careful�to�craft�a�good�“fit”�story.�If�you�are�trying�out�for�a�softball�team�and�the
softball�manager�needs�a�pitcher,�that’s�what�he’s�looking�for.�Not�a�catcher,�not�a
right�fielder.�Now�is�not�the�time�to�talk�about�collecting�baseball�cards,�winning
baseball�trivia�contests,�and�your�hobby�of�making�baseball-shaped�cakes.�You�just
talk�about�pitching.�In�the�screening�phase�of�the�process,�do�not�talk�about�your
other� amazing� talents� or� bring� up� skills� you� possess� that� aren’t� part� of� the� job
description.�You�will�come�across�as�unfocused.�You�might�sound�like�you�are�not
interested�in�the�job.�Worse�yet,�you�come�across�as�a�bad�listener,�because�you�will
be�perceived�as�answering�a�question�that�hasn’t�been�asked.�There�is�a�time�to
“stand� out”� later� in� the� process,� but� if� you� do� it� in� the� beginning,� you� will� be
ejected�from�the�candidate�pool.
Here�is�a�summary�of�our�tips�to�make�your�Internet�job�search�strategy�more
effective:
Tip� 1:� Rewrite� your� résumé� using� the� same� words� used� in� the� job� posting.� Say� “good
written� and� verbal� communication� skills,”� not� “I’m� a� good� writer� and� I
communicate�well”;�say�“passion�for�customers,”�not�“customer-centric�attitude.”
You�will�improve�your�chance�of�being�discovered�in�a�keyword�search.�And�be
generous;�now�is�not�the�time�for�modesty.�After�all,�who�isn’t�“highly�motivated”
and�“creative”?
Tip�2:�If�you�have�a�specific�skill�that�is�posted�as�required,�put�it�in�your�résumé�exactly�the
way� it� is� written� in� the� Internet� posting.�If�you�don’t�have�that�skill,�find�a�way�to
describe�your�skill�set�that�uses�the�same�words�that�will�be�found�in�a�keyword
search.
Tip�3:�Focus�your�résumé�on�the�job�as�described.�Even�if�the�job�description�isn’t�very
accurate,�this�will�increase�the�chance�that�your�résumé�will�show�up�in�a�search.
Then� focus� on� the� skills� that� you� can� offer� the� company,� using� their� words� as
often�as�possible.�Focus�on�what�you�can�do�for�them,�not�on�why�this�job�works
for�you.�Do�not�appear�to�be�a�generalist�or�a�multidisciplinary�person�on�your
résumé�or�in�the�first�interview.�Just�focus�on�answering�their�needs.�Once�you
have�reassured�them�that�you�have�the�skills�required,�you�can�move�on�to�impress
them�with�your�depth.�That’s�how�you�“stand�out.”
Tip�4:�Always�bring�a�fresh,�nicely�printed�copy�of�your�résumé�to�an�interview.�This�will
probably�be�the�first�time�anyone�will�see�the�care�you�put�into�designing�the�darn
thing.
There�are�a�couple�of�other�things�to�be�aware�of�if�you�want�to�practice�safe
surfing�on�the�Internet�for�jobs.�Knowing�about�these�can�save�you�hundreds�of
hours�of�fruitless�job�hunting.
The�Super–Job�Description�Syndrome
In�our�experience,�it’s�quite�common�for�people�to�post�job�qualifications�that�the
folks�currently�in�the�job�can’t�possibly�meet.�This�managerial�wishful�thinking�is�a
syndrome�affecting�most�of�corporate�America.�The�process�goes�something�like
this:
Jane�(the�employee�who�quit)�was�a�great�program�manager,�but,�boy,�I�wish�she
had�been�better�at�X,�Y,�and�Z.�Now�that�she’s�gone,�let’s�post�a�job�for�a�“Super
Jane”�and�list�all�the�things�that�Jane�used�to�do,�and�all�the�things�we�wish�she�had
done,�and�hope�for�the�best.
The� super–job� description� is� posted,� résumés� are� collected� from� keyword
searches,� and� candidates� are� screened� by� phone.� Interviews� are� scheduled,� and
candidate� after� candidate� is� interviewed� and� rejected� because� he� or� she� is� not� a
“Super�Jane.”�This�is�especially�true�since�no�one�who�fits�the�new�job�description
will� work� for� what� they� used� to� pay� Jane.� Interview� processes� like� these� are
essentially�broken—they�burn�out�both�the�interview�team�and�the�candidates,�and
nobody�gets�hired.
As�a�job�seeker,�you�want�to�find�out�as�soon�as�you�can�if�you’re�involved�in�an
interview�process�like�this.
One�way�is�to�do�some�research�and�find�out�how�long�the�job�has�been�posted.
In�a�good�labor�market,�a�job�posting�should�never�be�open�for�more�than�four
weeks�(six�at�the�max).
Another�is�to�find�out�how�many�people�have�already�been�interviewed.�Both
data� points� will� give� you� a� sense� of� what’s� going� on� behind� the� scenes.� It’s
surprisingly�not�hard�to�find�this�out.�Just�ask�one�of�the�people�on�the�interview
team.� If� they� are� in� this� situation,� they� know� something� is� wrong,� they� are
frustrated,�and�they�will�probably�tell�you.�And�they’ll�probably�confess�to�wanting
to�leave�the�company.�This�happens�more�often�than�you�think!
In�our�experience,�if�more�than�eight�people�have�been�through�the�wringer�and
no�decisions�have�been�made,�the�hiring�process�is�probably�broken.�This�is�a�sign
that�the�company�may�not�be�a�great�place�to�work,�and�you�might�want�to�walk
quickly�to�the�exit.
The�Phantom�Job�Listing�Syndrome
This�is�another�thing�to�be�on�the�lookout�for.�Many�companies�have�a�rule�that
before� they� can� hire� someone� for� a� job� they� have� to� post� the� job� description,
purportedly�to�make�sure�that�the�best�candidates�are�identified�and�hired.�But
many�times�managers�have�already�selected�an�internal�or�external�candidate�they
want�to�hire�for�the�job.�Being�good�at�getting�around�corporate�bureaucracy,�they
write�up�a�very�detailed�job�description—one�that�matches�their�candidate’s�résumé
exactly—post�the�“phantom”�job�description,�wait�the�required�two�weeks,�do�a�few
cursory�interviews,�and�then�hire�the�person�they�wanted�all�along.�Since�the�job
description� was� written� to� match� the� preselected� candidate’s� résumé,� the� hiring
manager�can�“prove”�that�he�or�she�hired�the�most�qualified�person.
These�“job”�openings�never�really�existed�at�all.�But�you�may�have�seen�one�and
applied,�thinking�it�was�real,�and�then�never�heard�back�from�the�company.�Or,
worse,�they�wasted�your�time�with�a�cursory�interview�and�then�never�followed�up.
One�way�to�tell�if�this�is�happening�is�to�find�out�how�quickly�job�descriptions
churn�on�a�company’s�website.�If�they�are�coming�and�going�every�week�or�two,
this�might�be�the�reason.
Warning:�Cool�Companies�and�False�Positives
There’s�a�particular�issue�to�be�aware�of�if�you’re�applying�to�a�cool�company—a
hot,�growing,�successful�company�that�everyone�wants�to�work�for.�Here�in�Silicon
Valley,�it’s�Google,�Apple,�Facebook,�and�Twitter—you�may�have�heard�of�them.
Cool�companies�can�be�found�in�all�healthy�industries;�you�probably�know�the
ones�in�the�industries�you’re�attracted�to.�The�problem�is�an�oversupply�of�not
only� qualified� candidates� but� really� great� candidates.� These� companies� have� far
more�top�candidates�than�they�have�openings.�Consequently,�cool�companies�have
no�fear�whatsoever�about�being�able�to�hire�terrific�people.�Their�only�fear�is�that
they�might�hire�a�bad�candidate.�If�a�company�erroneously�concludes�someone�is�a
good�candidate�when�the�person�is�really�just�average,�that’s�a�“false�positive”—and
it’s�a�hiring�nightmare.
A�bad�hire�is�incredibly�expensive�and�painful.�It’s�tough�to�fire�people�these
days�(employment�litigation�is�at�an�all-time�high),�and�after�you�do,�you�still�have
to�go�through�the�whole�search�process�again,�and�the�important�work�you�hired
them�for�isn’t�getting�done,�and�schedules�are�slipping,�and�money�is�being�lost,
and…The�list�goes�on�and�on.�Companies�will�do�anything�they�can�to�avoid�false
positives� in� hiring.� This� includes� being� quite� tolerant� of� false� negatives—
misperceiving�that�someone’s�a�bad�candidate�when�the�person�is�actually�a�great
candidate.�Mistakenly�letting�a�great�candidate�go�doesn’t�cost�a�cool�company�a
thing:� they� have� plenty� of� spare� great� candidates,� so� letting� a� few� spill� on� the
ground�is�a�much�better�mistake�to�make�than�hiring�a�bad�candidate.�Therefore,
cool�companies’�hiring�processes�are�sometimes�rather�draconian.�Great�people�get
rejected�frequently,�and�often�with�no�idea�why.�It�could�happen�to�you.�These
companies�often�can�get�people�who�really�are�almost�exactly�like�what�their�crazy
job�listing�is�asking�for�(I�know�we�said�that�doesn’t�happen�in�reality—but�cool
companies�distort�that�reality).�So,�if�you�are�at�all�out�of�alignment�with�their
desired�candidate�profile,�or�even�just�a�few�days�late�getting�into�line,�you�may
have�no�chance,�even�if�you’re�a�great�candidate�who�would�be�a�terrific�hire.�They
don’t� care.� They� don’t� have� to.� It’s� not� meanness—it’s� just� a� smart� business
decision,�grown�of�necessity�caused�by�their�popularity�and�success.
This�is�a�gravity�problem:�you�can’t�do�anything�about�it.�If�you�want�to�go�after
one�of�these�cool�companies,�you’re�just�going�to�have�to�play�their�game�by�their
rules�and�hope�you’ve�got�what�it�takes�to�win.�Remember,�they�do�want�to�hire
great�people,�and�the�company�may�be�a�great�place�to�work�if�you�can�just�pull�it
off.�If�you�want�to�work�at�a�cool�company,�you�really�do�want�to�get�connected�to
people�inside�that�company,�using�the�prototyping�conversations�we’ve�discussed.
A�personal�connection�can�help�you�greatly.�You’ll�still�have�to�go�through�the
hiring� process,� but� you’ll� have� some� help.� We’re� not� saying� you� shouldn’t� try—
many�employees�at�cool�companies�love�their�work,�so�it�may�be�worth�the�effort.
But�be�brutally�honest�with�yourself�about�your�chances,�and�caveat�emptor.
The�Way�It�Should�Be
One� thing� that� you� may� have� noticed� is� the� conspicuous� absence� of� job
descriptions�that�sound�like�this:
• Looking�for�candidates�who�would�like�to�connect�their�Workview
to�their�Lifeview
• Looking�for�candidates�who�believe�that�good�work�is�found
through�the�proper�exercise�of�their�signature�strengths
• Looking�for�candidates�with�high�integrity,�the�capacity�to�learn
quickly,�and�high�intrinsic�motivation;�we�can�teach�you�all�the�rest
In�our�perfect�world,�that’s�how�it�would�work.
So� here’s� how� it� goes:� Companies� post� these� tortured� job� descriptions� that
describe�almost�nothing�useful�about�the�job�to�the�potential�employee.�Then�they
surround� those� descriptions� with� ridiculous� comments� about� superheroes� and
courage.� None� of� the� job� descriptions� we� found� when� we� went� looking� on� the
Internet� seemed� to� address� any� of� the� issues� we’ve� been� discussing.� They� didn’t
speak�to�the�deeper�issues�of�why�we�work�or�what�work�is�for.�It’s�a�wonder�that
anyone�would�want�to�apply�for�one�of�these�jobs.
Remember,�life�designers�do�not�work�on�gravity�problems.�We�are�not�going�to
“fix”� Internet� job� postings.� But� don’t� worry.� Even� though� the� job� descriptions
posted� on� the� Internet� are� pretty� much� useless,� they� still� represent� a� potential
starting�point�in�your�conversation�with�the�institution�they�represent.
Awareness�is�key�to�life�design,�and�this�is�true�especially�when�you�are�designing
your� career.� If� you� are� aware� of� the� process� involved� in� hiring,� in� writing� job
descriptions,�in�reading�résumés,�in�interviewing�(from�the�employer’s�perspective),
your�success�rate�in�getting�a�job�offer�goes�way�up.�Empathy�is�a�crucial�element
in�design�thinking,�and�having�empathy—and�understanding—for�the�poor�hiring
manager�buried�under�a�sea�of�résumés�will�help�you�know�how�to�design�a�more
effective�job�hunt.�Effectiveness�in�getting�hired�involves�a�simple�yet�important
design�reframe.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�You�should�focus�on�your�need�to�find�a�job.
Reframe:�You�should�focus�on�the�hiring�manager’s�need�to�find�the�right
person.
The�bottom�line�is�that�there�is�no�perfect�job�that�you�perfectly�fit,�but�you�can
make�lots�of�jobs�perfect�enough.
8
Designing�Your�Dream�Job
Dysfunctional�Belief:�My�dream�job�is�out�there�waiting.
Reframe:�You�design�your�dream�job�through�a�process�of�actively�seeking�and
co-creating�it.
So,�if�your�dream�job�isn’t�on�the�front�doorstep�waiting�for�you�when�you�come
home,�where�do�you�find�it?�First�of�all,�let’s�clarify�that�there�is�no�dream�job.�No
unicorns.�No�free�lunch.�What�you�can�find�out�there�are�lots�of�interesting�jobs�in
worthwhile�organizations�populated�by�dedicated�and�hardworking�people�trying
to�do�honest�work.�There�are�good�jobs�in�good�places�with�good�co-workers,�and
there�are�at�least�a�couple�of�those�good�jobs�that�you�can�make�close�enough�to
perfect�so�you�can�really�love�them.�Those�are�the�“dream�jobs”�we�can�help�you
find,�but�almost�all�of�them�are�invisible�to�you�now,�because�they’re�part�of�the
hidden�job�market.
As�we�said�earlier,�we�don’t�recommend�mining�the�Internet�for�a�job.�In�fact,�in
the� United� States� only� 20� percent� of� all� the� jobs� available� are� posted� on� the
Internet—or�posted�anywhere,�for�that�matter.�This�means�a�full�four�out�of�five
jobs� that� are� available,� are� not� available� through� the� standard� model� of� job
hunting.�It’s�a�staggering�number;�no�wonder�so�many�people�feel�frustrated�and
rejected�when�job�seeking.
How�can�you�break�into�this�hidden�job�market?�Well,�you�can’t.�No�one�can.
There�is�no�such�thing�as�breaking�into�the�hidden�job�market.�The�hidden�job
market�is�the�job�market�that’s�only�open�to�people�who�are�already�connected
into� the� web� of� professional� relationships� in� which� that� job� resides.� This� is� an
insider’s�game,�and�it’s�almost�impossible�to�get�inside�that�web�as�a�job�seeker.�But
it’s� quite� possible� to� crack� into� the� network� as� a� sincerely� interested� inquirer—
someone� just� looking� for� the� story� (not� looking� for� the� job).� That’s� how� this
works.�It�is�a�wonderfully�happy�accident�that�the�very�best�technique�you�can�use
to� learn� what� kind� of� work� you� might� want� to� pursue� (prototyping� with� Life
Design�Interviews,�as�discussed�in�chapter�6)�is�exactly�the�best,�if�not�only,�way�to
get�into�the�hidden�job�market�in�your�field�of�interest,�once�you�know�what�you
want.�Kurt—the�one�with�master’s�degrees�from�Yale�and�Stanford,�and�thirty-eight
carefully� crafted� applications� with� zero� offers—was� disheartened� by� his� lack� of
success�with�traditional�job-finding�methods.�Realizing�it�was�time�to�apply�design
thinking�to�his�job�search,�Kurt�stopped�applying�for�jobs�and�began�conducting
Life�Design�Interviews.�He�conducted�fifty-six�authentic�prototype�conversations
with�people�he�was�genuinely�interested�in�meeting.�Those�fifty-six�conversations
resulted� in� seven� different� high-quality� job� offers,� and� one� dream� job� (the� real
kind,�not�the�fantasy�kind)—which�he�got.�He�now�works�full-time�for�a�company
where� he� has� flexible� hours,� a� short� commute,� decent� money,� and� work� that� is
meaningful�to�him�in�the�field�of�environmentally�sustainable�design.�And�he�got
access�to�the�opportunities�that�produced�those�seven�offers�not�by�asking�for�a�job
but�by�asking�for�people’s�life�stories—fifty-six�times.
Remember,�all�you’re�looking�for�from�a�Life�Design�Interview�(functioning�as�a
prototype�conversation)�is�to�learn�about�a�particular�kind�of�work�or�role�to�help
you�find�out�if�you�want,�at�a�later�date,�to�try�to�get�a�job�doing�that�kind�of�work
yourself.� While� conducting� the� conversation,� you� really� are� not� after� the� job—
you’re�after�the�story.�“But�wait�a�minute,”�you�say.�“You�just�told�me�how�Kurt
got� seven� offers� out� of� his� fifty-six� Life� Design� Interviews.� How’d� that� happen?
How�does�getting�the�story�turn�into�getting�the�job?”�Good�question.�Important
question.�The�answer�is�surprisingly�simple.
Most�of�the�time,�the�person�talking�to�you�does�it�for�you.�“Kurt,�you�seem
very�interested�in�what�we�do�here,�and�from�what�you’ve�said�so�far,�it�sounds�like
you�have�talents�we�could�use.�Have�you�ever�thought�of�working�someplace�like
this?”
More�than�half�the�time,�when�the�approach�we’re�recommending�results�in�an
offer,�they�initiate�it.�You�don’t�have�to.�If�they�don’t�start�it�for�you,�you�can�ask
one� question� that� will� convert� the� conversation� from� getting� their� story� to
pursuing�a�job.
“The�more�I�learn�about�XYZ�Environmental�and�the�more�people�I�meet�here,
the�more�fascinating�it�becomes.�I�wonder,�Allen,�what�steps�would�be�involved�in
exploring�how�someone�like�me�might�become�a�part�of�this�organization?”
That’s�it.�As�soon�as�you�ask,�“What�steps�would�be�involved�in�exploring�how
someone�like�me�might�become�a�part�of�this�organization?,”�Allen�knows�it’s�time
to�shift�gears�and�start�thinking�critically�about�you�as�a�candidate.�It�means�he’ll
start�using�his�judging�brain,�but�that’s�okay.�It’s�gotta�happen�sometime,�so�when
the�time�is�right—go�for�it.
Note�that�you�don’t�say,�“Wow—this�place�is�great!�Do�you�have�any�openings?”
For�the�reasons�already�mentioned,�the�answer�is�probably�“No.”�The�“What�steps
would� be� involved� in� exploring…”� question� is� open-ended� (not� yes� or� no)� and
invites�possibilities�far�beyond�just�what’s�available�today.�And�if�you’re�asking�it
of� someone� like� Allen,� with� whom� you’ve� established� a� connection� and� earned
some� regard,� we� hope� he’s� going� to� give� you� a� candid� but� supportive� reply.� In
some�cases,�Allen�may�even�say,�“No,�we�don’t�have�anything�coming�soon�around
here,�but�I�think�you�might�be�a�great�fit�in�one�of�our�partner�companies.�Have
you�met�anyone�at�Green�Space�yet?�I�think�you’d�like�what�they’re�doing.”
It�happens.�All�the�time.
By�the�way,�in�six�of�the�seven�places�where�Kurt�received�offers,�he�didn’t�have
to�ask�about�openings.�He�just�got�the�stories�of�the�people�he�was�interviewing,
and�they�asked�him.�All�but�one�of�the�offers�he�got�were�for�unlisted�jobs—part�of
the�hidden�job�market.�The�job�that�was�listed�was�the�one�he�ended�up�taking.�But
the�listing�wasn’t�posted�publicly�until�after�he’d�already�scheduled�a�Life�Design
Interview�with�the�CEO,�which�went�so�well�that,�by�the�time�it�was�posted,�he�had
it�wired.
Oh,� and� one� more� little� tidbit� about� Kurt’s� story.� The� final� interview� at� the
company�where�he�now�works�was�with�the�five-person�board�of�directors.�Their
first� question� was� “Do� you� think� you� can� be� effective� in� establishing� partner
relationships�within�the�sustainable�architecture�community�here?�After�all,�you’ve
just�moved�to�Georgia.”�Looking�around�the�table,�Kurt�had�the�happy�surprise�of
recognizing� three� of� the� five� board� members� as� people� he’d� already� met� over
coffee.�He�answered,�“Well,�I’ve�already�successfully�reached�out�to�three�of�you.
I’d�be�happy�to�keep�doing�that�kind�of�outreach�on�behalf�of�this�organization.”
Yeah—he� nailed� the� interview.� But� before� any� of� that,� he� had� to� do� a� lot� of
networking.
People:�The�Other�World�Wide�Web
When� Kurt� really� put� his� shoulder� into� the� hard� work� of� lining� up� lots� of
prototyping� conversations,� he� had� to� reach� out� to� all� kinds� of� people� to� get
connections�and�referrals�to�those�whom�he�needed�to�meet.�To�get�those�referrals,
Kurt�had�to�“network.”�He�had�to�reach�out�to�his�contacts,�and�their�contacts,
and�he�even�had�to�reach�out�to�strangers�he’d�identified�online.�Then�he�asked
those�people�whom�he�should�be�talking�to—whose�stories�he�should�be�getting�if
he�wanted�to�learn�more�about�sustainable�architecture�in�the�Atlanta�area.�It�was
hard.�It�was�not�Kurt’s�favorite�part�of�the�process�(actually,�it’s�nobody’s�favorite
part),�but�it�worked.�And�it’s�absolutely�necessary.
Now,� a� lot� of� people� have� an� instant� aversion� to� the� term� “networking.”� It
conjures� up� images� of� slick,� self-interested� people� manipulating� others� to� get
things�they�don’t�deserve,�or�hucksters�pretending�to�care�about�someone�just�for
the�purpose�of�using�that�person�to�get�to�someone�else.�These�negative�images�are
powerful�and�reinforced�by�lots�of�characters�in�films�and�novels,�as�well�as�too
many� real� people� we’ve� encountered� or� heard� about.� The� good� news� is� that,
although�these�stereotypes�are�not�without�real-life�examples,�they�are�by�far�the
minority.�Let�us�see�if�we�can�make�it�easier�for�you�by�giving�a�different�image�of
networking�(a�reframe).
Dysfunctional�Belief:�Networking�is�just�hustling�people—it’s�slimy.
Reframe:�Networking�is�just�asking�for�directions.
Think� about� the� last� time� you� were� walking� down� the� street� in� your� city� or
town,� and� an� unknown� car� pulled� up� slowly� alongside� you.� The� window� rolled
down,� and� the� driver� or� passenger� leaned� toward� you� with� an� obvious� look� of
distress.�Now,�depending�on�where�you�live,�your�first�instinct�may�have�been�to
duck�and�take�cover,�run�screaming,�or�pull�out�your�can�of�pepper�spray,�but�for
most�of�us�the�first�inclination�would�be�to�offer�help.
The�person�in�the�car�is�lost�and�asking�you�for�directions�to�the�nearest�coffee
shop,�or�freeway�entrance,�or�amusement�park,�or�antiques�stores.�What�do�you
do?� Well,� most� of� us� will� give� them� directions� if� we� can.� We� help� them� out.
Perhaps�they�ask�you�a�little�about�your�town,�other�places�they�might�want�to
visit,�or�they�ask�you�what�the�service�is�like�at�the�coffee�shop�you’ve�directed
them�to.�They�leave,�and�you�go�on�your�way.�How�do�you�feel�when�they�drive
away�with�your�directions�and�information?�Do�you�feel�used?�Are�you�offended
that�they�won’t�call�you�the�next�day�or�become�your�friend�on�Facebook,�or�that
they�care�more�about�getting�to�the�nearest�coffee�shop�than�they�care�about�you?
Of�course�not.�You�are�not�friends.�You�haven’t�entered�into�a�relationship.�What
you�do�feel�is�great�about�having�helped�another�human�being.�Multiple�studies
confirm�this—most�of�us�like�being�helpful.�It’s�hard-wired�into�our�DNA.�We�are
social�creatures,�and�helping�one�another�is�one�of�the�things�that�makes�us�feel
best.
Kurt� didn’t� know� his� way� around� the� sustainable� architecture� industry� in
Atlanta.�You�may�not�know�your�way�around�the�nanotechnology�community�in
Hong�Kong,�or�the�craft�beer�crowd�in�Wichita,�or�the�emergency-room�nursing
union�in�Seattle.�What�do�you�do?�You�ask�a�local�for�directions.�Getting�referrals
to�people�whose�stories�would�be�useful�to�hear�is�just�the�professional�equivalent
of�asking�directions.�So�go�ahead—ask�for�directions.�It’s.�No.�Big.�Deal.
“Network”�is�more�noun�than�verb.�The�point�isn’t�to�“do”�network-ing;�the�goal
is�to�participate�in�the�network.�Simply�put,�it�just�means�to�enter�into�a�particular
community� that’s� having� a� particular� conversation� (such� as� sustainable
architecture).� Every� domain� of� human� endeavor� is� held� together� by� a� web� of
relationships�between�people.�Real�people.�That�web�is�the�fabric�that�undergirds,
contains,�and�holds�together�that�part�of�society.�The�Stanford�“network”�that�we
are�a�part�of�holds�Stanford�together.�The�Silicon�Valley�“network”�is�the�loose
community�of�West�Coast�folk�that�allows�tech�entrepreneurship�to�flourish.�Most
individuals� have� both� a� professional� network� (of� colleagues)� and� a� personal
network� (of� friends� and� family).� The� most� common� way� for� people� to� be
introduced� across� professional� networks� is� by� referrals� from� personal� networks.
This� isn’t� favoritism—it’s� just� communal� behavior.� The� use� of� personal� or
professional�networks�to�initiate�new�people�into�a�community’s�conversation�is�a
good�thing.�The�network�exists�to�sustain�the�community�of�people�getting�the
work�done—and�is�the�only�way�to�gain�access�to�the�hidden�job�market.
Speaking� of� the� World� Wide� Web,� it� turns� out� that� networking� is� one� place
where�the�Internet�really�can�transform�your�job�search.�Use�the�Internet�not�to�get
online�job�listings�but�to�find�and�reach�out�to�the�people�whose�stories�you�want
to�hear.�Bella,�one�of�our�students�who�graduated�a�few�years�ago,�just�called�to�tell
us�how�happy�she�was,�and�how�well�this�approach�had�worked�for�her.�She�had
successfully�figured�out�what�she�wanted�to�do�(impact�investing�in�the�developing
world)�and�designed�her�way�to�three�great�offers�in�that�field�including�the�one
she�accepted�with�a�boutique�firm�she’d�never�heard�of�before—and�it�only�took
two�hundred�conversations�to�do�it.�Two�hundred.�In�just�six�months.�Really.
Bella�reported�that�she�was�able�to�find�and�reach�out�to�well�over�half�of�those
two�hundred�by�using�Google�and�LinkedIn.�Of�course�she�did�her�homework�on
individuals� and� organizations� and� networked� to� obtain� a� personal� referral
whenever�she�could,�but�smartly�leveraging�her�use�of�Internet�tools�made�a�huge
difference.�LinkedIn�has�utterly�transformed�our�ability�to�find�the�people�we’re
looking�for.�There�are�lots�of�books�and�online�programs�to�teach�you�how�to�be
effective� using� these� tools� (some� of� the� best� ones� are� offered� by� LinkedIn
themselves).�Use�them.�If�you�become�a�superstar�at�using�LinkedIn�and�Google,
the�Internet�can�make�a�difference�for�you,�and�will�no�longer�be�the�black�hole
into�which�you�submit�countless�applications.
Focus�on�Offers—Not�Jobs
Every� year,� the� National� Association� of� Colleges� and� Employers� (NACE),� a
nonprofit� established� in� 1956,� compiles� data� on� new� college� graduates� and
employment,�such�as�the�average�salary�of�recent�graduates,�top�skills�employers
are�looking�for,�and�also�what�graduates�report�as�the�top�things�they�are�looking
for� when� it� comes� to� a� job.� Guess� what� the� first� consideration� was� of� the
graduating�class�of�2014�when�looking�for�a�job.1
Nature�of�the�work.
Salary�and�the�friendliness�of�co-workers�come�in�second�and�third,�to�complete
this�completely�dysfunctional�job-seeker�trifecta.
The�problem�with�this�scenario�is�that�there�is�no�way�to�know�the�real�“nature
of� the� work”� before� you� have� gotten� very� close� to� actually� getting� the� job.� It’s
impossible.�Since�so�many�job�descriptions�are�dysfunctional�and�inaccurate,�most
people�rule�out�a�job�as�not�being�“right”�for�them�before�they’ve�even�applied
(and�before�they�actually�know�what�they’re�rejecting).�It’s�a�nasty�chicken-and-egg
problem� that� can� severely� shrink� your� potential� opportunities.� That’s� why� the
most�important�reframe�when�you�are�designing�your�career�is�this:�you�are�never
looking�for�a�job,�you�are�looking�for�an�offer.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�I�am�looking�for�a�job.
Reframe:�I�am�pursuing�a�number�of�offers.
Now,� this� might� not� seem� like� a� big� distinction� at� first,� but� it� is� critical.� It
changes� everything—from� what� jobs� you� consider,� to� how� you� approach� cover
letters�and�résumés,�to�how�you�interview,�to�how�you�close�the�deal�and�ultimately
get�the�opportunities�you’re�looking�for.�The�biggest�impact�of�this�reframe�is�on
your�mind-set.�It�shifts�you�from�being�a�person�deciding�whether�or�not�you’d
take�this�job�(which�you�know�nothing�about)�to�being�a�person�who�is�curious�to
find� out� what� kind� of� interesting� offer� you� might� be� able� to� find� in� that
organization.�It�flips�you�from�judging�to�exploring,�from�negative�to�positive—
and�that’s�a�huge�difference.
When�you�are�looking�for�a�job,�your�focus�is�on�that�job,�and�your�behavior
toward� getting� that� job� becomes� centered� around� convincing� the� institution� to
hire�you�and�conveying�to�them�that�this�is�your�absolute,�ultimate�job,�which�you
were�born�wanting.�You�have�to�convince�the�person�or�people�in�charge�of�filling
that�job�that�you�and�the�job�description�are�the�perfect�fit�(match�made�in�heaven,
can’t�live�without�each�other,�have�to�be�together�or�else).�Since�you�don’t�really
know�much�about�the�nature�of�the�work,�you�have�to�fake�your�enthusiasm�to
make�this�process�work.�In�other�words,�you�either�lie�or�you�don’t�apply.
And�nobody�likes�to�lie.
But� when� you� are� looking� for� an� offer� rather� than� a� job—when� your� goal
switches�from�getting�one�job�to�getting�as�many�job�offers�as�possible—everything
changes.�You�don’t�have�to�be�deceptive.�You�can�be�genuinely�curious�about�the
job,�because�it�is�absolutely�true�that�you�would�like�the�opportunity�to�evaluate�an
offer.� It’s� not� a� matter� of� semantics;� it’s� a� matter� of� authenticity.� When� you
reframe� the� job� search� into� an� offer� search,� you� end� up� being� more� authentic,
energetic,� persistent,� and� playful� while� you� pursue� your� next� position� or
opportunity.�And,�ironically,�this�ends�up�making�you�more�likely�to�get�the�offer.
People� don’t� hire� résumés;� they� hire� people.� People� they� like.� People� who� are
interesting.�And�you�know�what�types�of�people�each�of�us�is�most�interested�in
(whether�it’s�as�a�potential�date�or�a�potential�employee)—the�ones�who�are�most
interested�in�us.
It� goes� back� to� curiosity—one� of� the� most� important� life� design� mind-sets.
Whether�you�are�seeking�your�first�job,�changing�careers,�or�choosing�an�encore
career,�you�need�to�be�genuinely�curious.�That’s�what�prototyping�conversations
and� prototyping� experiences� are� all� about:� being� open� and� curious� about� the
possibilities.�We�call�it�pursuing�latent�wonderfulness.�What�this�means�is�that�you
ask� yourself,� “Is� there� a� 20� percent� chance� there’s� something� interesting� to� me
going� on� somewhere� in� this� organization?� Is� there� a� 10� percent� chance?”� If� the
answer�is�yes,�then�don’t�you�want�to�find�it?�Of�course�you�do,�and�that�desire�to
find�it�allows�you�to�show�genuine�curiosity�and�a�willingness�to�pursue�the�latent
wonderfulness�in�an�organization�you�may�have�unnecessarily�dismissed�outright
as�not�being�a�fit�for�you.
You� can’t� know� the� nature� of� the� work� until� you’ve� conducted� further
investigation,�until�you’ve�pursued�the�offer.�You�can’t�know�it�from�a�faulty�job
description.�You�can’t�know�it�because�of�preconceived�notions�about�what�it’s�like
to�do�that�job,�or�work�for�that�company.
You�rarely�know�too�much�about�a�job�before�you�get�the�offer,�so�pursue�all�the
offers�you�can.�All�you�need�is�the�possibility�that�one�of�them�might�be�a�fit.
That’s�it,�just�a�possibility.�And�maybe�someday,�when�the�NACE�does�its�annual
study�of�what�college�graduates�are�looking�for�in�a�job,�the�number�one�thing�isn’t
going�to�be�the�nature�of�the�work.�It’s�going�to�be�latent�wonderfulness.�It’s�going
to�be�more�about�possibility�than�preconception.
The�Job�Charming�Fairy�Tale
Kurt�entered�into�genuine�conversations,�and�he�found�a�good�job�that�he’s�been
able�to�build�into�a�great�job.�You�can�do�the�same.�We�know�this�is�hard.�We
know� this� is� a� lot� of� work� and� is� sometimes� scary.� But� it’s� also� incredibly
interesting�and�is�the�only�way�we�know�to�crack�the�hidden�job�market.�To�some
degree,� it’s� also� a� numbers� game—the� more� connections� you� make,� the� more
prototypes�you�run,�the�more�opportunities�will�turn�into�offers.
Consider�the�alternatives.
Thirty-eight�applications�for�zero�offers.
Fifty-six�conversations�for�seven�offers�and�a�great�professional�network.
Which�approach�do�you�like�better?�It’s�your�call.
It�is�more�than�possible�to�use�design�thinking�to�get�your�first�job,�transform
your� current� job,� design� your� next� job,� and� create� a� career� that� integrates� your
Workview�and�your�Lifeview.�In�fact,�we�recommend�it,�because�there�is�no�Job
Charming�coming�to�rescue�you.�The�idea�that�your�dream�job�already�exists,�fully
formed,�just�waiting�for�you�to�find�it,�is�a�fairy�tale.
You�design�your�“really�pretty�terrific�and�surprisingly�close�to�a�dream”�job�the
same�way�you�design�your�life—by�thinking�like�a�designer,�by�generating�options,
by�prototyping,�and�by�making�the�best�choices�possible.
And�by�learning�to�live�into�those�choices.
9
Choosing�Happiness
Designing�a�career�and�a�life�requires�not�only�that�you�have�lots�of�options�and
good�alternatives,�as�we�have�discussed;�it�also�requires�the�ability�to�make�good
choices�and�live�into�those�choices�with�confidence,�which�means�you�accept�them
and�don’t�second-guess�yourself.�Regardless�of�where�you’ve�started,�what�stage�of
life�and�career�you�are�in,�how�great�or�dire�you�perceive�your�circumstances�to�be,
we�would�bet�our�last�dollar�that�there�is�one�goal�you�all�have�in�this�life�you�are
designing:
Happiness.
Who�doesn’t�want�to�be�happy?�We�want�to�be�happy,�and�we�want�our�students
to�be�happy,�and�we�want�you�to�be�happy.
In�life�design,�being�happy�means�you�choose�happiness.
Choosing�happiness�doesn’t�mean�you�should�click�your�heels�together�three
times� while� wishing� to� go� to� your� happy� place.� The� secret� to� happiness� in� life
design�isn’t�making�the�right�choice;�it’s�learning�to�choose�well.
You� can� do� all� the� work� of� life� design—ideating� and� prototyping� and� taking
action—all�leading�to�some�really�cool�alternative�life�design�plans,�but�this�doesn’t
guarantee�you�will�be�happy�and�get�what�you�want.�Maybe�you’ll�end�up�happy
and�getting�what�you�want,�and�maybe�you�won’t.�We�say�“maybe”�because�being
happy� and� getting� what� you� want� are� not� about� future� risks� and� unknowns� or
whether�you�picked�the�right�alternatives;�it’s�about�how�you�choose�and�how�you
live�your�choices�once�they’re�made.�All�of�your�hard�work�can�be�undone�by�poor
choosing.�Not�so�much�by�making�the�wrong�choice�(that’s�a�risk,�but,�frankly,�not
a�big�one,�and�usually�one�you�can�recover�from)�as�by�thinking�wrongly�about
your� choosing.� Adopting� a� good,� healthy,� smart� life� design� choosing� process� is
critical�to�a�happy�outcome.�Many�people�are�using�a�choosing�model�that�cuts
themselves� off� from� their� most� important� insights� and� actually� prevents� them
from� being� happy� with� their� choices� after� they’ve� been� made.� We� see� it� all� the
time,�and�studies�agree:�many�people�guarantee�an�unhappy�outcome�by�how�they
approach�this�all-important�design�step�of�choosing.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�To�be�happy,�I�have�to�make�the�right�choice.
Reframe:�There�is�no�right�choice—only�good�choosing.
On� the� flip� side,� choosing� well� almost� guarantees� a� happy� and� life-giving
outcome,�while�setting�you�up�for�more�options�and�a�better�future.
The�Life�Design�Choosing�Process
In�life�design,�the�choosing�process�has�four�steps.�First�you�gather�and�create�some
options,�then�you�narrow�down�your�list�to�your�top�alternatives,�then�you�finally
choose,� and� then,� last� but� not� least,� you…agonize� over� that� choice.� Agonize� over
whether�you’ve�done�the�right�thing.�In�fact,�we�encourage�you�to�spend�countless
hours,�days,�months,�or�even�decades�agonizing.
Just�kidding.�People�can�waste�years�agonizing�over�the�choices�they’ve�made,
but�agonizing�is�a�time�suck.�Of�course�we�don’t�want�you�to�agonize,�and�that�is
not�the�fourth�step�in�the�life�design�choosing�process.
The�fourth�step�in�the�process�is�to�let�go�of�our�unnecessary�options�and�move
on,�embracing�our�choice�fully�so�that�we�can�get�the�most�from�it.
We�need�to�understand�each�of�these�choosing�steps�to�appreciate�the�important
difference�between�good�choosing,�which�results�in�reliably�happy�outcomes�and
more�future�prospects,�and�bad�choosing,�which�preconditions�us�for�an�unhappy
experience.
Step�1:�Gather�and�Create�Options
Gathering� and� creating� options� is� what� we’ve� been� discussing� throughout� this
book.� Having� good� insights� about� yourself,� exploring� options� about� where� to
engage� with� the� world,� and� prototyping� experiences� are� the� ways� that� your� life
design�process�generates�ideas,�alternatives,�and�viable�options�that�you�can�pursue
(all�pursued,�of�course,�with�a�curious�mind-set�in�which�you’re�looking�for�latent
wonderfulness,� and� approached� with� a� bias� to� action� versus� overthinking).� We
won’t� spend� any� more� time� on� option� generation� here,� other� than� to� tell� you
(again)�to�write�your�Workview�and�Lifeview,�to�create�mind�maps,�do�your�three
Odyssey�Plan�alternatives,�and�prototype�conversations�and�experiences.�You�can
use�these�option-generating�tools�for�any�area�of�your�life.
Step�2:�Narrow�Down�the�List
Some�people�feel�they�don’t�have�enough�(or�any)�options.�Other�people,�and�most
designers,�feel�they’ve�got�too�many.�If�you’ve�got�too�few,�then�go�back�to�all�those
suggestions�we’ve�already�made�(step�one),�and�invest�the�time�needed�to�cultivate
more�ideas�and�options.�It�may�take�weeks�or�months�to�build�up�a�list�you�really
like,�which�is�just�fine.�After�all,�it’s�your�life�we’re�designing�here,�and�this�is�not
going�to�happen�overnight.
Now,�once�you’ve�got�a�hefty�list�of�options,�chances�are�that�you’re�struggling
with�all�the�possibilities.�You�look�over�all�your�ideas�and�all�the�suggestions�other
people� have� given� you� and� all� the� things� you� could� possibly� do� with� your� life,
and…it� can� feel� overwhelming.� You� find� yourself� unable� to� choose—or� at� least
unable�to�choose�with�confidence—so�you�figure�you’ve�done�something�wrong.
You�must�not�have�done�enough�“homework”�and�understood�your�options�well
enough.�“If�only�I�had�better�information�and�a�clearer�picture�of�these�options,
I’d�know�which�one�to�choose.”�And�off�you�go�to�do�more�research,�interviewing,
and�prototyping.�And�it�doesn’t�work.�It�doesn’t�work�because,�even�though�not
having�enough�information�is�sometimes�a�real�problem,�it’s�usually�not�the�core
issue.�By�the�time�most�of�us�are�getting�close�to�an�important�decision,�we’ve�done
our� homework.� We� may� not� know� everything� there� is� to� know—in� fact,� all� our
investigating�actually�makes�clearer�to�us�what�we�don’t�know�than�what�we�do
know,� so� we’re� pretty� sure� more� research� would� be� helpful—but� that’s� not� it.� If
you’re�like�most�of�us,�then�the�reason�your�choosing�process�is�stuck�isn’t�about
your�knowledge—it’s�about�the�length�of�your�list�and�your�relationship�with�all
those�options.�We�can�most�easily�make�this�point�clear�by�looking�at�how�people
buy�jam.
Professor� Sheena� Iyengar� from� the� Columbia� Business� School� is� a� psycho-
economist�who�specializes�in�decision�making.�Her�famous�“jam�study”�was�done
using�specialty�jams�in�a�grocery�store.�One�week,�the�researchers�set�up�a�table�in
the� store� showing� off� six� different� specialty� jams� (with� snazzy� flavors� like� kiwi-
orange,� strawberry-lavender…you� get� the� idea).� Then� they� watched� how� the
shoppers�behaved—who�stopped�to�look�and,�of�those�who�stopped,�who�actually
bought� some� jam.� The� first� week,� with� six� jams� on� display,� 40� percent� of� the
shoppers�stopped�to�check�out�the�six�jams�and�about�a�third�of�them�bought�one
—about�13�percent�of�the�shoppers.
A�few�weeks�later,�in�the�same�store,�with�the�same�time�frame,�the�researchers
came� back� with� twenty-four� jams.� This� time,� 60� percent� of� the� shoppers� in� the
store�stopped�by—a�50�percent�increase�over�the�six-jam�display!�But�with�twenty-
four�jams�on�display,�only�3�percent�of�the�shoppers�bought�one.
What� does� this� research� tell� us?� First,� that� we� love� having� options� (“Whoa!
Twenty-four�jams?!�Let’s�check�this�out!!”),�and,�second,�that�we�can’t�deal�with�too
many� of� them� (“Um…so� many…can’t� decide;� let’s� go� get� some� cheese”).� In� fact,
most� minds� can� choose� effectively� between� only� three� to� five� options.� If� we’re
faced� with� more� than� that,� our� ability� to� make� a� choice� begins� to� wane—many
more�than�that�and�our�ability�to�choose�completely�freezes.�It’s�just�the�way�our
brains�are�wired.�We’re�attracted�to�having�alternatives,�and�our�modern�culture
almost�idolizes�options�for�their�own�sake.�Get�lots�of�options!�Keep�your�options
open!�Don’t�get�locked�in!�We�hear�this�sort�of�thinking�all�the�time,�and�it�seems
to�make�sense,�but�there�absolutely�can�be�too�much�of�this�good�option�thing.
When�you�toss�in�the�Internet�and�the�fact�that�we�can�now�be�made�aware�of
seemingly�every�idea�and�activity�on�the�planet�after�a�subsecond�Google�search,
most�of�us�are�suffering�a�pandemic�attack�of�too�many�options.
The� key� is� to� reframe� your� idea� of� options� by� realizing� that� if� you� have� too
many�options,�you�actually�have�none�at�all.�If�you�get�frozen�in�front�of�your
daunting�list�of�possibilities,�then,�in�fact,�you�have�no�options.�Remember�that
options�only�actually�create�value�in�your�life�when�they�are�chosen�and�realized.
We�often�teach�our�students�that�when�an�option�grows�up�it�becomes�a�choice.
So,�when�you’ve�got�twenty-four�jam�options,�you�actually�have�zero�options.�Once
you� understand� that,� in� choice� making,� twenty-four� equals� zero� (and,� boy,� is� it
hard�to�believe�when�you�love�your�options�and�worked�so�hard�to�find�and�come
up�with�them),�then�you�are�free�to�take�the�next�step:�narrowing�down.
So�what�exactly�do�you�do�with�too�many�options?�Simple.�Get�rid�of�some.
First,�if�it�turns�out�that�a�lot�of�your�options�group�together�into�categories,�you
can�break�your�list�down�into�smaller�sublists.�That�may�help�you�get�to�your�top
contender�for�each�option�type.�But�eventually�you’ll�be�in�that�overwhelmed-by-
too-many-options�place�and�have�to�get�rid�of�a�bunch�of�those�jams.�How?�Just
cross�them�off�your�list.
If�you’ve�got�a�list�of�twelve�options,�cross�out�seven,�then�rewrite�your�list�with
just�the�remaining�five�on�it,�and�go�to�step�three.
Most�of�our�students�and�clients�freak�out�at�this�idea.
“You�can’t�just�cross�options�off!”
“What�if�I�cross�out�the�wrong�one?”
We�understand.�But�we’re�not�kidding—you�just�cross�them�off.�Remember,�if
you’ve�got�too�many�options,�you�really�don’t�have�any,�so�you’ve�got�nothing�to
lose.�And�you�won’t�cross�off�the�wrong�one.�We�call�this�the�Pizza-Chinese�Effect.
We’ve�all�experienced�it.�Ed�sticks�his�head�in�your�office�and�says,�“Hey,�Paula—
we’re�going�out�for�lunch.�Wanna�come?”
“Sure!”
“We’re�choosing�between�pizza�and�Chinese�food—got�a�preference?”
“Nah—whatever’s�good!”
“Okay—we’re�getting�pizza.”
“No,�wait.�I�want�Chinese!”
In� that� situation,� when� you� gave� your� first� answer� (“whatever’s� good”),� you
thought� you� meant� it.� You� didn’t� know� that� you� had� a� preference� until� an
unwanted�decision�occurred�as�a�fait�accompli.�Only�after�the�choice�was�named�did
you� become� aware� of� your� preference.� So� you� really� can’t� lose� when� you’re
shortening� your� list� of� options.� If� you� cross� out� the� wrong� ones,� you’ll� know
afterward.� You� may� have� to� go� as� far� as� crossing� out� seven� of� the� twelve� and
rewriting�that�new,�clean�list�of�just�five�before�you�realize�it,�but�if�it’s�wrong,
you’ll�know.�Trust�us�when�we�tell�you�that�you�can�trust�yourself.�And�if�you�find
that�you�can’t�choose�among�the�five�alternatives,�either,�check�which�of�two�very
different�reasons�might�apply.�The�most�common�reason�is�that�you’re�still�just�in
agony�over�losing�those�seven�other�options�and�are�refusing�to�let�them�go.�If
that’s�the�case,�then�do�whatever�you�need�to�in�order�to�shorten�your�list.�Burn
the�list�of�the�seven�you�rejected,�put�it�all�down�for�a�day�or�two,�then�come�back
to�your�list�of�five�later�and�treat�that�list�as�the�list�(not�the�shortened�list),�but�do
eventually�get�going.�If,�however,�you�can’t�act�on�your�list�of�five�because�you
really�can’t�find�any�preferences�or�meaningful�distinctions�between�them,�then—
you�win!�You�have�just�discovered�that�you’ve�got�a�can’t-lose�situation�on�your
hands.�That�means�that�all�five�options�are�strategically�worthwhile�for�you,�with
no� real� distinctive� difference.� They� will� all� work� for� you,� which� leaves� you� to
choose�based�on�secondary�considerations�(the�drive�is�easier,�the�logo�is�cool,�the
story�will�be�sexier�at�cocktail�parties).
The�point�is�that�you�want�to�leave�the�store�with�some�jam.
Step�3:�Choose�Discerningly
Now—once�you’ve�done�the�preliminary�work�of�gathering�and�narrowing�down
(and,� yes,� you� do� want� to� gather� lots� of� options� up� front,� choice� overload
notwithstanding,�because�then�you’re�choosing�from�the�best�list),�the�hard�part
starts:�actually�choosing.
To�choose�well,�we�need�to�understand�how�our�brains�work�in�the�process�of
choosing.� Where� do� good� choices� come� from,� and� how� do� we� know� when� we
know?�Fortunately,�we�are�now�living�in�an�era�of�unprecedented�progress�in�brain
research,�and�we’re�learning�tons�about�how�we�think,�remember,�and�decide.�In
1990,�John�Mayer�and�Peter�Salovey�wrote�the�seminal�scholarly�article�launching
the�concept�of�“emotional�intelligence”�and�proposing�that,�in�achieving�success
and� happiness,� our� “EQ”� was� as� important� as,� and� in� many� situations� more
important�than,�our�“IQ,”�measuring�our�cognitive�intelligence.1�In�1995,�the�New
York� Times� science� writer� Dan� Goleman� popularized� their� ideas� in� his� book
Emotional� Intelligence,� and� a� cultural� phenomenon� was� launched.2� “Emotional
intelligence”� is� a� phrase� everybody� has� heard� and� has� some� regard� for,� but� few
people�fully�understand�what�it�means,�and�fewer�still�are�learning�and�benefiting
from�it.
It�turns�out�that�the�part�of�the�brain�that�is�working�to�help�us�make�our�best
choices�is�in�the�basal�ganglia.�It’s�part�of�the�ancient�base�brain,�and�as�such�does
not�have�connections�to�our�verbal�centers,�so�it�does�not�communicate�in�words.
It�communicates�in�feelings�and�via�connections�to�the�intestines—those�good�old
gut�feelings.�The�memories�that�inform�this�choice-guiding�function�in�our�brains
Goleman�refers�to�as�the�“wisdom�of�the�emotions”;�by�this�he�means�the�collected
experiences�of�what�has�and�hasn’t�worked�for�us�in�life,�and�what�we�draw�upon
in� evaluating� a� decision.� Our� own� wisdom� is� then� made� available� to� us
emotionally�(as�feelings)�and�intestinally�(as�a�bodily,�gut�response).�Therefore,�in
order�to�make�a�good�decision,�we�need�access�to�our�feelings�and�gut�reactions�to
the�alternatives.
Remember�that�default�response�to�being�stuck�on�a�decision:�I�must�need�more
information!�We�can�now�see�that�that�is�exactly�what�we�do�not�need.�It�is�our�too-
noisy� brains,� talking� at� us� constantly� as� they� try� to� cogitate� our� way� to� a� good
decision,� that� are� getting� in� the� way� of� connecting� to� our� gut� feelings� on� the
decision.�It�is�very�important�to�have�good�information�available—to�do�lots�of
homework�and�take�lots�of�notes�and�make�spreadsheets�and�comparisons�and�talk
to�experts,�et�cetera,�et�cetera,�et�cetera.�But�once�that�work�is�done—led�by�the
prefrontal� cortex� of� the� brain,� which� runs� the� executive� functions� of� coding,
listing,� and� categorizing—we� need� access� to� that� wisdom� center� where� our� well-
informed�emotional�knowing�can�help�us�discern�the�better�choices�for�us.
We�define�discernment�as�decision�making�that�employs�more�than�one�way�of
knowing.� We� mostly� use� cognitive� knowing—all� that� good,� objective,� organized,
informational�kind�of�knowing—the�sort�of�knowing�that�gets�you�A’s�in�school.
But�we�also�have�other�ways�of�knowing,�including�the�affective�forms�of�intuitive,
spiritual,�and�emotional�knowing.�Add�to�those�both�social�knowing�(with�others)
and�kinesthetic�knowing�(in�our�bodies).�An�incredibly�skilled�therapist�friend�of
Dave’s�always�knew�when�she�was�getting�to�the�important�issue�with�a�client:�her
left�knee�would�start�to�ache.�She�didn’t�know�why�it�was�her�left�knee,�but�over
years�of�attentive�practice�she�came�to�trust�what�her�knee�had�to�tell�her.�Because
she�learned�to�listen�to�her�knee,�she�was�able�to�make�better�decisions�and�better
serve�her�clients�by�having�access�to�that�awareness.
The�key�to�step�three�is�to�make�discerning�decisions�by�applying�more�than�one
way�of�knowing,�and�in�particular�not�applying�just�cognitive�judgment�by�itself,
which�is�informed�but�not�reliable�on�its�own.�We�aren’t�suggesting�making�only
emotional�decisions,�either.�We�all�have�examples�of�emotions�getting�people�in
trouble� (though� usually� those� are� impulse� emotions,� and� that’s� a� very� different
thing),�so�we’re�not�saying�to�swap�your�brain�for�your�heart�or�your�gut.�We’re
inviting� you� to� integrate� all� your� decision-making� faculties,� and� to� be� sure� you
make�space�so�your�emotional�and�intuitive�ways�of�knowing�can�surface�in�the
process.
In�other�words,�don’t�forget�to�listen�to�your�knee�or�your�gut�or�your�heart,
too.
Doing�this�requires�that�you�educate�and�mature�your�access�to�and�awareness�of
your� emotional/intuitive/spiritual� ways� of� knowing� (or� however� you� may� name
these�affective�aspects�of�our�shared�humanity).�For�centuries,�the�most�commonly
affirmed� path� to� such� maturity� has� been� that� of� personal� practices� such� as
journaling,�prayer�or�spiritual�exercises,�meditation,�integrated�physical�practices
like�yoga�or�Tai�Chi,�and�so�on.
We� don’t� have� the� space,� nor� do� we� claim� the� expertise,� to� coach� you� on
forming�your�set�of�personal�practices,�but�we�do�encourage�you�to�do�so.�The
reason�practices�work�to�give�you�better�access�to�your�best�wisdom�in�discerning�a
good�decision�relates�precisely�to�the�nature�of�such�insights.�Emotional,�intuitive,
and�spiritual�forms�of�knowing�are�usually�subtle,�quiet,�and�even�shy.�Rarely�do
people�get�access�to�their�deepest�wisdom�by�rushing�around�a�few�hours�before�a
deadline�and�talking�a�lot�or�surfing�the�Web.�It’s�a�slower,�quieter�thing.�Practices
are� just� that—practice.� We� both� practice� regularly,� month� in� and� month� out—
especially�during�our�off�season,�when�there’s�no�pressure�to�perform�and�we�can
focus�on�just�doing�the�practice�and�gaining�strength�and�balance.�The�time�for
gaining�maturity�by�practice�isn’t�during�the�playoffs,�when�things�are�stressful�and
demanding.� Decision� making� is� stressful,� so� the� best� time� to� prepare� for� good
choosing�is�when�there’s�no�choice�at�stake.�That’s�when�you�can�invest�in�your
emotional�intelligence�and�spiritual�maturity�so�that�those�muscles�are�strong�and
trained�when�it’s�decision�or�game�time.
The�best�time�to�get�ready�for�step�three�is�months�or�years�before�the�choosing.
That�means�the�best�time�is�right�now—today�is�the�best�day�to�start�making�that
investment.
Here’s�one�specific�technique�you�can�try�that�emphasizes�accessing�the�wisdom
of�your�emotions:�grok�it.
Grokking
In�his�1960s�sci-fi�classic�Stranger�in�a�Strange�Land,�Robert�Heinlein�invented�the
word� “grok”� to� describe� a� way� of� knowing� that� Martians� employ.� It� means� to
understand� something� deeply� and� completely,� so� much� so� that� you� feel� you’ve
become� one� with� it.� Because� of� its� rarity,� Martians� don’t� just� understand� what
water�is�or�drink�water—they�grok�it.�Now�grok�has�entered�more�common�cultural
use;� “I� grok� that”� is� sort� of� like� “I� get� that,”� only� more� so.� It’s� “I� get� that”� on
steroids.
When�you�finally�get�down�to�making�a�choice�from�your�narrowed-down�list�of
alternatives,� and� you’ve� cognitively� evaluated� the� issues,� and� emotionally� and
meditatively�contemplated�the�alternatives,�it�may�be�time�to�grok�it.�To�grok�a
choice,� you� don’t� think� about� it—you� become� it.� Let’s� say� you’ve� got� three
alternatives.�Pick�any�one�of�them�and�stop�thinking�about�it.�Choose�to�think�for
the�next�one�to�three�days�that�you�are�the�person�who�has�made�the�decision�to
pick�Alternative�A.�Choice�A�is�your�reality�right�now.�When�you�brush�your�teeth
in�the�morning,�you�do�so�having�chosen�A.�When�you�sit�at�a�red�light,�you’re
waiting�to�proceed�toward�your�destination�related�to�living�in�Alternative�A.�You
may�or�may�not�actually�say�things�to�other�people�about�this—such�as�“Oh�yeah,
I’m� moving� to� Beijing� in� May!”—because� such� statements� will� cause� confusion
later.� But� you� get� the� idea:� you’ll� just� live� in� your� head� as� the� person� in� an
Alternative�A�reality.�You�are�not�thinking�about�Alternative�A�from�your�current
reality�as�a�struggling�choice�maker.�You�are�living�calmly�as�one�who�has�chosen
A.�After�one�to�three�days�of�this�(how�long�is�up�to�you�and�a�matter�of�taste),
then�take�at�least�a�day�or�two�off�to�be�your�regular�self�and�reset.�Then�do�the
same�thing�with�Alternative�B,�then�another�reset�break,�then�Alternative�C.�Then
one� more� reset� break� and,� finally,� a� thoughtful� reflection� on� what� those
experiences�were�like�and�which�one�of�those�people�you�might�most�like�to�be.
This�technique�isn’t�guaranteed�(no�such�techniques�are),�but�you�can�see�how�the
intention�here�is�to�allow�your�alternate�forms�of�knowing—emotional,�spiritual,
social,� intuitive—to� have� some� room� to� express� themselves� to� you,� and� thereby
complement�the�evaluative,�cognitive�knowing,�which,�if�you’re�like�most�of�us,�is
the�dominant�form�of�thinking�and�choosing�you�rely�on.
Step�4:�Agonize�Let�Go�and�Move�On
Before�we�discuss�the�step�of�letting�go,�it’s�important�to�address,�at�least�briefly,
why�the�fourth�step�is�not�“agonize.”�Agonizing�looks�like�this:
“Did�I�do�the�right�thing?”
“Am�I�sure�this�is�really�the�best�decision?”
“What�if�I’d�done�option�four�instead?”
“I�wonder�if�I�can�go�back�and�do�it�over?”
If� you’ve� no� idea� what� we’re� talking� about� here,� consider� yourself� unusually
fortunate,�thank�your�parents�for�good�brain-chemistry�DNA,�and�skip�ahead.�But
if�you’re�like�most�of�us,�these�are�familiar�questions.�We�hear�lots�of�groans�of
recognition�when�we�say,�“And�the�last�step�is…agonize�about�the�decision�over
and�over!”�Those�groans�are�a�signal�of�our�shared�humanity�in�this�experience�of
decision�making.�The�reason�we’re�agonizing�is�that�we�care�about�our�lives�and
the�lives�of�others.�These�decisions�matter,�and�we�want�to�do�our�best�to�give�the
future�its�best�possible�chance.�We�want�to�make�good�decisions,�but�of�course�we
can’t�possibly�know�if�we’ve�done�so�right�away:�unknowns�are�always�out�there,
and�none�of�us�can�see�the�future�accurately.�So�how�do�we�beat�this�post-decision
agony�thing?
It� turns� out� that� our� mind-set� about� how� to� make� a� good� decision� is� as
important�as�which�decision�we�make.�It�seems�obvious�that�the�best�way�to�be
happy� with� a� choice� is� to� make� the� best� choice.� Simple� enough—except� it’s
impossible.�You�can’t�make�“the�best�choice,”�because�you�can’t�know�what�that
best� choice� was� until� all� the� consequences� have� played� out.� You� can� work� on
making�the�best�choice�you�can,�given�what’s�knowable�at�the�moment,�but�if�your
goal�is�“make�the�best�choice,”�you�won’t�be�able�to�know�if�you’ve�done�it.�Your
inability� to� know� that� keeps� you� focused� on� whether� or� not� you� did� the� right
thing,� and� keeps� you� rehearsing� the� alternatives� not� chosen:� this� is� called
agonizing.�And�all�that�rehashing�drains�satisfaction�with�the�choice�you�did�make
and�distracts�you�from�getting�energetically�ahead�on�the�choice�you�have�made.
Dan� Gilbert� at� Harvard� has� looked� at� this� area� and� demonstrated� the� effect
letting�go�of�your�options�has,�in�a�study�evaluating�how�people�made�decisions
about�different�Monet�art�prints.3�He�asked�people�to�rank�five�different�Monet
prints�according�to�their�preference,�numbering�them�from�one�to�five.�Whichever
prints� the� subjects� ranked� numbers� three� and� four� he� said� the� experimenters
happened�to�have�spare�copies�of�and�were�letting�subjects�take�one�home�with
them.�Of�course,�most�of�the�people�took�the�one�they�had�ranked�number�three.
Then,� interestingly,� the� experimenters� told� some� of� the� people� that� they� could
swap�the�one�they�took�for�the�other�one�later�if�they�wanted�to,�and�the�other
people�were�told�that�whatever�print�they�took�home�was�it—no�swapping.
After�a�few�weeks,�the�experimenters�checked�back�with�the�subjects.�The�people
who�had�been�told�they�could�swap�their�prints—even�though�they�had�not�done�so
—were� less� happy� with� their� choices� than� the� people� who� had� chosen� the� exact
same� prints� but� had� been� told� the� choice� was� irreversible.� It� turns� out� that
reversibility� is� not� conducive� to� establishing� reliable� happiness� with� a� decision.
Apparently,�just�the�invitation�to�reconsider�and�“keep�your�options�open”�makes
us�doubt�and�devalue�our�choice.
But�wait…it�gets�worse.�In�his�book�The�Paradox�of�Choice,�the�researcher�Barry
Schwartz� informs� us� that� this� nasty� little� feature� of� how� our� brains� handle
decisions� goes� even� further.4� When� we� make� a� decision� in� the� face� of� many
options,�or�just�while�perceiving�that�there�are�lots�of�other�options�that�we�don’t
even�know�about,�we�are�less�happy�with�our�choice.�The�problem�here�is�not�just
the� options� we� had� and� didn’t� pursue� (the� options� we� “keep� open”)—it’s� that
mountain�of�options�we�never�even�had�time�to�check�out.�The�perception�that
there�are�gazillions�of�possibilities�that�may�have�been�great�but�that�we�never�got
to�is�a�powerful�force�against�being�at�peace�with�our�choice�making;�even�if�we
don’t�know�what�it�was,�there�must�have�been�a�better�option�out�there,�and�we�missed�it.
In�the�Internet-powered,�globalized�world,�there�are�always�a�gazillion�options,�so
we�are�now�more�capable�of�being�unhappy�with�our�choices�than�any�generation
in�history�has�been.
Yay�for�us!
The� key� is� to� remember� that� imagined� choices� don’t� actually� exist,� because
they’re�not�actionable.�We’re�not�trying�to�live�a�fantasy�life;�we’re�trying�to�design
a�real�and�livable�life.�If�we�burdened�ourselves�with�knowing�everything�about�our
decisions�and�discovering�every�option�possible�(which,�of�course,�you�should�do�if
you’re�going�to�make�“the�best�choice”),�we’d�never�decide.�In�life�design�we�know
that�there�are�countless�possibilities�but�aren’t�stymied�by�that�fact.�We�revel�in
exploring� a� few� possibilities,� then� taking� action� by� starting� with� a� choice.� Only� by
taking� action� can� we� build� our� way� forward.� So� let’s� get� better� and� better� at
building�by�getting�better�and�better�at�letting�go�of�the�options�we�don’t�need�any
longer.�(And�now�you�have�the�confidence�to�know�that�you�can�always�get�more
options� in� the� future,� just� the� way� you� got� these.)� This� is� key� to� choosing
happiness�and�being�happy�with�our�choices.
When�in�doubt…let�go�and�move�on.
It�really�is�that�simple.
We�are�not�saying�you�pretend�you�don’t�know�about�the�roads�not�taken,�or
that�you�will�never�again�discover�something�halfway�down�the�path�and�decide�to
back�up�and�make�a�correction.�What�we�are�saying�is�that�there�is�a�smarter�way�to
proceed,� which� will� significantly� enhance� your� ability� to� be� successful� in
implementing�your�choices,�and�lead�to�happiness�and�satisfaction�on�the�journey.
Do�yourself�the�favor�of�getting�lots�of�options,�then�culling�the�list�down�to�a
short� and� manageable� size� (five� max);� then� make� the� best� choice� that� you� can,
given�the�time�and�resources�available�to�you,�get�on�with�it,�and�build�your�way
forward.�Note�that�if�you’re�doing�this�with�prototype�iteration,�you�don’t�have
too�much�at�stake,�and�you�will�be�able�to�adjust�as�you�go,�before�you�really�reach
a�significant�investment.�And�once�you�make�a�choice—then�embrace�your�choice
and�go�with�it.�When�the�questions�that�lead�to�agonizing�creep�into�your�head,
evict� the� thoughts,� and� direct� your� energy� into� living� well� the� decisions� you’ve
made.�Pay�attention�and�learn�as�you�go,�of�course,�but�don’t�get�caught�with�your
eyes�fixated�on�the�rearview�mirror�of�decision�regret.
This�letting-go�step�relies�primarily�on�personal�discipline.�Keep�your�reframed
understanding� of� decision� making� handy,� and� be� sure� to� win� the� internal
argument�with�yourself�when�you’re�tempted�to�rehash�and�ruminate.�Put�in�place
the�support�you�need�to�stick�with�it—find�a�life�design�collaborator�or�team�to
help�remind�you�why�you�made�the�choice�or�choices�you�did;�make�a�journal
entry�about�your�decision,�and�reread�it�when�you�get�confused.�Find�what�works
to�enable�yourself�to�enjoy�your�choices�fully.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�Happiness�is�having�it�all.
Reframe:�Happiness�is�letting�go�of�what�you�don’t�need.
Letting�Go�by�Grabbing�On
Andy�was�a�top�premed�student.�Except�he�wasn’t�really�a�premed,�he�was�a�pre–
public-health�or�pre–med-tech-entrepreneur�student.�Andy�had�two�primary�ideas
about� his� future� and� one� backup,� all� in� response� to� the� same� big� mission—fix
health�care.
Andy� could� see� that� the� health-care� system� needed� massive� reform,� with
significant�increases�in�preventive�care�and�wellness�management,�if�we�were�ever
going� to� fix� health� care’s� disproportionate� drain� on� the� economy,� and� the
inaccessibility�of�medicine�to�all�but�the�wealthy.�He�thought�there�were�two�ways
he�could�be�most�effective�at�making�an�impact.�He�could�become�an�influential
health-care� public-policy� adviser,� or� he� could� become� a� medical-technology
entrepreneur.�Though�it�was�out�of�vogue�among�his�friends�to�consider�getting
involved�in�government�and�the�public�sector,�Andy�could�see�that�only�the�people
adjusting�the�really�big�control�dials�on�health�care�were�going�to�be�in�a�position
to� cause� deep� change.� As� far� as� medical� technology,� he� knew� there� was� a� lot
happening�in�that�sphere,�and�new�technology�could�spur�behavior�changes�that
could� possibly� get� traction� faster—since� they� moved� at� the� speed� of� the
marketplace,�not�politics.
His�backup�plan�was�to�“just�be�a�doctor.”�It�sounded�funny�to�say�it�that�way,
given�how�respected�the�noble�role�of�physician�is�in�our�society,�and�especially�in
his�Asian�extended�family—but�that’s�how�he�always�said�it�to�himself.�He�wasn’t
being�dismissive;�he�was�being�honest.�His�backup�plan�was�an�insurance�policy�in
the�event�he�couldn’t�find�a�way�to�make�a�wide�societal�impact�and�needed�to
redirect�his�efforts�to�a�smaller�playing�field.�He�figured�that�an�individual�doctor
certainly�could�make�an�impact�within�his�practice,�and�possibly�even�in�his�local
hospitals�and�region.�Maybe�that�was�a�path�to�offering�a�shining�example�of�what
better�health�care�could�be.
Which�way�to�choose?�Actually,�that�wasn’t�the�tough�decision�for�him.�Andy
was� convinced� that� the� policy� route� was� the� most� potentially� impactful� and
interesting,�so�that’s�the�path�he�was�going�to�pursue.�The�tough�choice�was�how�to
do� it.� Should� he� go� right� from� undergraduate� studies� into� a� master’s� in� public
health�(M.P.H.)�and�then�right�off�to�Washington?�Or�go�to�medical�school�and
get� his� M.D.� first—then� get� his� M.P.H.?� Andy� knew� that� in� the� medical� culture
M.D.s�are�revered,�and�their�counsel�on�all�things�medical�bears�much�more�weight
than� that� of� non-M.D.s.� He� didn’t� actually� believe� that� getting� an� M.D.� would
make�him�a�smarter�or�more�effective�policy�maker,�but�he�really�wanted�to�make�a
difference� and� was� willing� to� consider� the� eight� to� ten� years� it� would� take� to
enhance� his� credibility� (four� years� to� get� an� M.D.,� and� four� to� six� years� from
residency�to�licensing).
This�was�a�tough�decision�for�him�to�make.�Ten�years�felt�like�an�incredibly�long
time�to�wait�to�get�started�on�what�he�wanted�to�do.
Andy�kept�going�around�and�around�in�his�head,�but�couldn’t�land�on�a�choice
that�he�felt�good�about.�As�soon�as�he’d�decide�to�get�his�M.P.H.�now�and�get
started,�he’d�say,�“But…if�they�don’t�listen�to�me,�that�head�start�doesn’t�do�any
good!”�And�as�soon�as�he’d�land�on�going�to�med�school,�he’d�say,�“But…ten�years
is�just�too�long�to�wait—who�knows�what�will�happen�by�then?”�Andy�kept�chasing
his�own�thoughts�in�an�endless�circle.�He�said�he�felt�as�if�his�brain�were�stuck�on�a
hamster�wheel,�squeaking�around�and�around�all�night�long.
Andy� stopped� thinking� about� the� decision� and� grokked� it.� As� he� did� so,� he
discovered�that�Med�School�Andy�felt�better�than�Just�Policy�School�Andy.�While
walking� around� being� the� guy� becoming� a� doctor,� Med� School� Andy� found
himself�feeling�worried�about�those�ten�years,�but�then�thinking,�“Yeah—it’s�a�long
time.�But�I’m�really�committed�to�this�goal�of�impacting�health�care.�I�know�that
the�path�I’m�taking�means�I’m�doing�everything�I�can�to�prepare�well�and�give�it�my
best�shot.�The�problems�will�still�be�huge�a�decade�from�now;�I’m�not�going�to
miss� it.� I� just� don’t� think� I� could� live� with� myself� if� I� didn’t� do� my� best.”� By
contrast,� when� the� question� about� “What� if� no� one� pays� any� attention� to� me
without�an�M.D.?”�occurred�to�Just�Policy�School�Andy,�he�didn’t�have�a�good
answer;�all�he�could�do�was�feel�lousy�about�it.
So�he�chose�to�go�to�med�school�and�dedicate�the�next�ten�years�to�becoming�a
licensed�M.D.,�almost�solely�in�order�to�be�a�more�credible�policy�maker�in�the
future.�Okay—choice�made,�job�done.�Right?
Wrong.
Andy�still�had�to�implement�step�four—to�let�go�and�move�on.�Andy�quickly
realized�why�we�gave�this�name�to�step�four.�The�secret�to�letting�go�is�moving�on.
Merely�letting�go�is�an�incredibly�hard�thing�to�do—some�would�say�it’s�impossible.
For� example,� right� now,� put� anything� in� your� mind’s� eye� except� a� blue� horse.
Whatever�you�do—do�not�think�about�or�see�a�blue�horse.�No�spotted�blue�horse.
No�blue�unicorn.�No�blue�pygmy�pony�with�a�red-and-white�striped�saddle�and�a
pink�ribbon�on�its�tail.
Please�keep�not�seeing�a�blue�horse�for�the�next�sixty�seconds.
Okay,�how�did�you�do?�If�you’re�like�everybody�we’ve�ever�worked�with,�you
were�stampeded�by�blue�horses.�That’s�the�problem�with�letting�go—it’s�more�of�an
inaction�than�an�action,�and�your�brain�just�hates�that,�the�same�way�nature�abhors
a�vacuum.�So�the�key�to�letting�go�is�to�move�on�and�grab�something�else.�Put�your
attention�on�something—not�off�something.
How�was�Andy�going�to�let�go�of�the�worry�and�distraction�that�he�was�wasting�a
decade�of�his�life?�How�was�he�going�to�let�go�of�all�those�images�of�getting�his
M.P.H.�in�just�two�years�and�jogging�the�halls�of�Congress,�becoming�the�hot�new
policy�wonk�in�health�care?�Andy�realized�that�the�way�out�of�it�is�into�it,�and
asked,�“How�can�I�move�on�and�move�into�becoming�a�doctor?”
As�soon�as�he�did�that,�Andy�realized�that�his�Med�School�Andy�choice�gave
him�his�backup�plan�for�free—becoming�a�doctor.�He�knew�that�medical�students
actually�start�doing�medicine�within�the�first�few�years�of�their�training,�and�all�the
residency�years�are�spent�doing�clinical�work.�What�kind�of�specialties�would�be
most�relevant�to�health-care�policy?�What�medical�schools�had�the�strongest�ties�to
Washington� and� an� affiliated� M.P.H.� program?� What� kind� of� care-providing
institutions�would�teach�him�the�most:�A�local�clinic?�A�big�hospital?�Small�towns?
Cities?�As�soon�as�he�began�to�embrace�what�his�medical�training�could�contribute
and�how�he�could�make�the�most�of�it,�he�had�tons�of�ideas�and�lots�of�interesting
questions� to� pursue.� By� imagining� his� way� into� moving� on,� he� gave� his� mind
permission� to� let� go.� And� he� came� up� with� lots� of� ways� to� have� prototype
conversations�and�prototype�experiences�related�to�health-care�policy�in�his�role�as
a�medical�student�and�a�resident.
Andy�was�a�star�pupil.
No�More�Hamster�Wheel
Designers� don’t� agonize.� They� don’t� dream� about� what� could� have� been.� They
don’t�spin�their�wheels.�And�they�don’t�waste�their�futures�by�hoping�for�a�better
past.�Life�designers�see�the�adventure�in�whatever�life�they�are�currently�building
and�living�into.�This�is�how�you�choose�happiness.
And,�really,�is�there�any�other�choice?
10
Failure�Immunity
Imagine�there�was�a�vaccine�that�could�prevent�you�from�ever�failing.�Just�one�tiny
shot,� and� your� life� would� be� guaranteed� to� go� exactly� as� planned—nothing� but
smooth�sailing�and�success�after�success,�as�far�as�your�eye�could�see.�An�entire�life
without�failure�sounds�pretty�good,�doesn’t�it?�No�disappointment,�no�setbacks,
no�trouble,�and�no�loss�or�grief�seems�like�a�fine�way�to�live�to�most�of�us.�Nobody
likes� failure.� It� feels� terrible—that� horrible� sinking� sensation� in� the� pit� of� your
stomach,�the�heavy�weight�of�defeat�that�can�make�your�chest�feel�like�it’s�being
crushed.
Who�doesn’t�want�to�be�immune�to�failure?
Unfortunately,� there’s� no� vaccine,� and� it’s� impossible� never� to� fail.� But� it� is
possible�to�be�immune�from�failure.�We�don’t�mean�you’ll�be�able�to�avoid�the
experience� of� having� things� not� work� out� the� way� you� hoped� for;� but� you� can
become�immune�to�the�large�majority�of�negative�feelings�of�failure�that�burden
your�life�needlessly.�If�you�use�the�ideas�and�tools�that�we’ve�been�talking�about�so
far,� you� will� reduce� your� so-called� failure� rate,� which� is� great,� but� we’re� after
something� much� more� valuable� than� just� failure� reduction.� We’re� after� failure
immunity.
We’ve�been�trying�a�lot�of�different�things�on�the�way�to�designing�a�life�that�is
worth�the�living.�Using�the�curiosity�mind-set,�we’ve�gone�out�into�the�world�and
met�some�interesting�people.�We’ve�radically�collaborated�with�friends�and�family
and�prototyped�some�meaningful�engagements�with�the�world.�And�throughout
this�life�design�journey,�we’ve�gotten�comfortable�with�the�bias-to-action�mind-set,
and�whenever�we’re�in�doubt,�we�know�it’s�time�to�do�something.
All� along,� you� have� been� developing� something� positive� psychologists� like
Angela�Duckworth�call�perseverance�or�grit.1�Duckworth’s�studies�on�grit�and�self-
control� demonstrate� that� grit� is� a� better� measure� of� potential� success� than� IQ.
Failure�immunity�gives�you�grit�to�spare.
It’s�important�to�think�of�ourselves�as�life�designers�who�are�curious�and�action-
oriented,�and�who�like�to�make�prototypes�and�“build�our�way�forward”�into�the
future.�But�when�you�take�this�approach�to�designing�your�life,�you�are�going�to
experience� failure.� In� fact,� you� are� going� to� “fail� by� design”� more� with� this
approach� than� with� any� other.� So� it’s� important� to� understand� what� “failure”
means�in�our�process,�and�how�to�achieve�what�we�call�failure�immunity.
The�fear�of�failure�looms�so�large�in�people’s�experience�of�their�lives.�It�seems
to�relate�to�a�fundamental�perception�in�the�way�people�define�a�good�or�a�bad�life.
She�was�a�success�(yay,�good!).�He�was�a�failure�(boo,�bad!).�When�you�look�at�it�that
way,�no�one�wants�to�be�a�failure.�We�imagine�that�at�our�funerals�there�will�be
some� external� judge� (or� some� imagined� life� tenure� committee)� who� will� pass
judgment�on�whether�we�managed�to�succeed�or�ended�up�failing.
Fortunately,� if� you’re� designing� your� life,� you� can’t� be� a� failure.� You� may
experience� some� prototypes� and� engagements� that� don’t� attain� their� goals� (that
“fail”),�but�remember,�those�were�designed�so�you�could�learn�some�things.�Once
you�become�a�life�designing�person�and�are�living�the�ongoing�creative�process�of
life�design,�you�can’t�fail;�you�can�only�be�making�progress�and�learning�from�the
different�kinds�of�experiences�that�failure�and�success�both�have�to�offer.
Infinite�Failure
We�trust�that�you�now�understand�that�prototyping�to�design�your�life�is�a�great
way�to�succeed�sooner�(in�the�big,�important�things)�by�failing�more�often�(at�the
small,� low-exposure� learning� experiences).� Once� you’ve� done� this� prototype-
iteration� cycle� a� number� of� times,� you� will� really� begin� to� enjoy� the� process� of
learning�via�the�prototype�encounters�that�other�people�might�call�failure.�As�an
example,� one� day� just� before� our� large� Designing� Your� Life� class� started,� Dave
made�a�big�change�to�one�of�the�teaching�exercises�for�that�day’s�class.�He�had�an
idea�and�just�wanted�to�try�something�out.�He�didn’t�even�have�time�to�tell�Bill,�so
Bill�heard�it�at�the�same�time�as�the�students�did.�After�Dave�announced�the�(never
before�attempted)�exercise�and�the�students�were�working�on�it,�Bill�came�over�to
Dave�and�said,�“This�is�great!�I�love�that�you�are�willing�to�fail�miserably�in�front
of�eighty�students!�I�have�no�idea�if�this�exercise�is�going�to�work,�but�I�love�how
you’re�prototyping�it!”�Dave�and�Bill�have�come�to�trust�the�process�of�life�design
so�completely�that�they�don’t�ever�have�a�conversation�about�the�right�way�to�run
their�classes.�When�you�really�get�the�hang�of�the�design�thinking�approach,�you
end�up�thinking�differently�about�everything.
This�is�the�first�level�of�failure�immunity—using�a�bias�to�action,�failing�fast,�and
being�so�clear�on�the�learning�value�of�a�failure�that�the�sting�disappears�(and,�of
course,�you�learn�from�the�failure�quickly�and�incorporate�improvements).�By�the
way,� that� exercise� in� class� went� pretty� well,� and� then� we� decided� to� jettison� it
anyway�and�keep�the�prior�version�of�the�exercise�because�it�was�more�effective.
What�a�success!
There’s� a� whole� other� level� of� failure� immunity� that� we� call� big� failure
immunity,� which� comes� from� understanding� the� really� big� reframe� in� design
thinking.�Are�you�ready?�Designing�your�life�is�actually�what�life�is,�because�life�is�a
process,�not�an�outcome.
If�you�can�get�that,�you’ve�got�it�all.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�We�judge�our�life�by�the�outcome.
Reframe:�Life�is�a�process,�not�an�outcome.
We�are�always�growing�from�the�present�into�the�future,�and�therefore�always
changing.�With�each�change�comes�a�new�design.�Life�is�not�an�outcome;�it’s�more
like�a�dance.�Life�design�is�just�a�really�good�set�of�dance�moves.�Life�is�never�done
(until�it�is),�and�life�design�is�never�done�(until�you’re�done).
The�philosopher�James�Carse�wrote�an�interesting�book�called�Finite�and�Infinite
Games.2�In�it�he�asserts�that�just�about�everything�we�do�in�life�is�either�a�finite
game,�one�in�which�we�play�by�the�rules�in�order�to�win—or�an�infinite�game,�one�in
which�we�play�with�the�rules�for�the�joy�of�getting�to�keep�playing.�Getting�an�A�in
chemistry�is�a�finite�game.�Learning�how�the�world�is�put�together�and�how�you�fit
in� it� is� an� infinite� game.� Coaching� your� son� to� win� the� spelling� bee� is� a� finite
game.� Having� your� son� come� to� trust� that� you� love� him� unconditionally� is� an
infinite� game.� Life� is� full� of� both� kinds� of� games.� (By� games� we� don’t� mean
something�trivial�or�childish.�In�this�context,�it�simply�means�how�we�act�in�the
world�and�what�importance�we�place�on�our�actions.)�Everyone�is�playing�both
finite� and� infinite� games� all� the� time.� One� kind� is� not� better� than� the� other.
Baseball�is�a�great�game�to�play,�but�it�doesn’t�work�without�rules�and�winners�and
losers.�Love�is�an�infinite�game—when�played�well,�it�goes�on�forever,�and�everyone
plays�to�keep�it�going.
So�what�does�this�have�to�do�with�life�design?�Just�this:�when�you�remember�that
you�are�always�playing�the�infinite�game�of�becoming�more�and�more�yourself�and
designing�how�to�express�the�amazingness�of�you�into�the�world,�you�can’t�fail.
With�the�infinite-game�mind-set,�you�are�not�just�adept�at�failure�reduction—you
are�truly�failure-immune.�Sure,�you’ll�experience�pain�and�loss�or�serious�setbacks,
but�they�won’t�make�you�less�of�a�person,�and�you�don’t�experience�these�setbacks
as�an�existential�“failure”�from�which�you�can’t�recover.
Being�and�Doing
For�millennia,�people�have�struggled�with�the�difficulty�of�balancing�our�focus�on
ourselves� as� human� beings� (which� is� more� prevalent� in� Eastern� cultures)� or� as
human�doings�(which�is�more�prevalent�in�Western�cultures).�Being�or�doing?�The
real�inner�me,�or�the�busy,�successful�outer�me?�Which�is�it?�Life�design�thinks
that’s�a�false�dichotomy.�Since�life�is�a�wicked�problem�that�we�never�“solve,”�we
just�focus�on�getting�better�at�living�our�lives�by�building�our�way�forward.�This
diagram�is,�we�think,�a�better�way�to�imagine�the�process:
When� designing� your� life,� you� start� with� who� you� are� (chapters� 1,� 2,� and� 3).
Then� you� have� lots� of� ideas� (rather� than� wait� and� wait� to� have� the� idea� of� the
century)�and�you�try�things�out�by�doing�them�(chapters�4,�5,�and�6),�and�then�you
make�the�best�choice�you�can�(chapter�8).�As�you�do�all�this,�including�making
choices�that�set�you�on�one�path�for�a�number�of�years,�you�grow�various�aspects
of� your� personality� and� identity� that� are� nurtured� and� called� upon� by� those
experiences—you� become� more� yourself.� In� this� way,� you� energize� a� very
productive�cycle�of�growth,�naturally�evolving�from�being,�to�doing,�to�becoming.
Then�it�all�repeats,�as�the�more-like-you�version�of�you�(your�new�being)�takes�the
next�step�of�doing,�and�so�it�goes.
All�of�life’s�chapters—both�the�wonderfully�victorious�and�the�painfully�difficult
and�disappointing—keep�this�growth�cycle�going�if�we�have�the�right�mind-set.�In
this�way�of�seeing�and�experiencing�things,�you’re�always�succeeding�at�the�infinite
game�of�discovering�and�engaging�your�own�life�in�the�world.
And�that�mind-set�is�a�great�big�dose�of�our�version�of�the�failure�immunity
vaccine.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�Life�is�a�finite�game,�with�winners�and�losers.
Reframe:�Life�is�an�infinite�game,�with�no�winners�or�losers.
Now,�you�may�be�thinking�that�this�sounds�good,�but�in�the�real�world�it’s�just
not�so�simple.�We�do�believe�(and�we’ve�seen�it�in�others�and�lived�it�ourselves)
that�you�really�can�reframe�failures�in�such�a�way�that�you�transform�setbacks�and
have� a� happier,� more� fulfilling� life.� This� isn’t� just� our� own� rehash� of� positive
thinking;�it’s�a�design�tool�that’s�imperative�to�life�design.
Failure� is� just� the� raw� material� of� success.� We� all� screw� up;� we� all� have
weaknesses;�we�all�have�growing�pains.�And�we�all�have�at�least�one�story�in�us�of
an� occasion� when� we’ve� reframed� a� particular� failure,� where� we’ve� changed� our
perspective,�and�have�seen�how�a�failure�turned�out�to�be�the�best�thing�that�ever
happened.
We� all� have� our� stories� of� redemption.� A� perfectly� planned� life� that� never
surprises�you�or�challenges�you�or�tests�you�is�a�perfectly�boring�life,�not�a�well-
designed�life.
Embrace�the�flaws,�the�weaknesses,�the�major�screwups,�and�all�the�things�that
happened�over�which�you�had�no�control.�They�are�what�make�life�worth�living
and�worth�designing.
Just�ask�Reed.
Winning�and�Losing�and�Winning
Reed�always�wanted�to�be�a�class�officer�at�school,�so�he�started�running�for�office
as�soon�as�he�could,�in�fifth�grade.�He�lost.�He�ran�in�sixth�grade—and�lost�again.
He�ran�for�office�every�year,�often�twice�a�year,�and�lost�every�single�time.�By�the
end�of�his�junior�year�of�high�school,�he’d�run�for�one�school�office�or�another
and�lost�thirteen�times�in�a�row.�During�his�last�year�of�high�school,�he�decided�to
run�one�more�time—for�senior�class�president.
Over�the�years,�Reed’s�parents�watched�with�agony�as�the�losses�mounted�up.
After�four�or�five�losses,�they�would�wince�every�time�Reed�announced,�“I’m�going
to� run� again!”� They� were� smart� enough� not� to� discourage� him,� but� inside� they
wished�he’d�just�let�it�go�and�stop�the�bleeding.�They�couldn’t�stand�to�see�him
going�through�all�those�failures.�But�Reed�didn’t�mind.�Oh�sure,�he�hated�losing—
but�he�wasn’t�changing�his�mind.�He�knew�that�if�he�kept�at,�it�he’d�learn�what�he
was�doing�wrong�and�eventually�he’d�win—or�at�least�he’d�learn�a�bit�more.�In�his
mind,�failure�was�just�part�of�the�process.�With�each�successive�loss,�losing�got�less
painful,�which�allowed�him�to�take�risks�to�see�if�new�approaches�would�work.�It
gave� him� the� courage� to� try� out� for� other� things—sports,� acting.� Most� of� these
didn’t�pan�out,�but�a�couple�did.�Though�he�was�delighted�with�his�successes,�he
would�have�been�just�fine�even�if�he’d�failed�at�those,�too.�Failing�over�and�over
freed� him� to� focus� his� energies� on� running� the� best� campaigns� he� could.� Each
failure� was� a� lesson,� so� when� he� ran,� he� never� worried� about� losing.� When� he
finally�won�and�became�senior�class�president,�he�was�thrilled,�but�the�point�isn’t
that�he�finally�won—the�point�is�how�he�kept�running.
It�turned�out�to�be�a�more�important�lesson�than�he�realized.
At�twenty-two,�to�anyone�who�looked�at�him�from�the�outside,�Reed�seemed
finally�to�be�winning�at�life.�Boy�Scout.�Class�president.�Quarterback.�Ivy�League.
Crew�champion.�When�he�graduated�from�college�with�a�degree�in�economics,�his
life� seemed� set� on� a� straight� course� for� success� followed� by� more� success.� He
landed�a�job�with�a�top�firm�and�for�the�first�few�years,�his�new�career�was�going
great.
His�job�took�him�on�the�road�often,�and�during�a�business�trip�to�the�Midwest,
Reed�noticed�a�strange�lump�just�below�his�neck.�He�went�to�a�clinic�during�his
lunch�break�to�check�it�out,�and�by�the�time�he�boarded�his�flight�home�three�days
later,�a�doctor�has�confirmed�his�worst�fears:�Hodgkin’s�disease,�a�cancer�of�the
lymph�nodes.�When�he�got�home,�he�immediately�began�chemotherapy.
Cancer�at�twenty-five�was�not�part�of�Reed’s�life�design.�But�it�was�now�part�of
his�life.
A�lifetime�of�experience�dealing�with�failure�had�paid�off.�Pretty�quickly,�Reed
was�able�to�accept�the�reality�of�his�situation�and�put�all�his�energies�into�getting
better.�He�didn’t�get�stuck�asking,�“Why�me?”�Nor�did�he�believe�he�had�failed�at
being�healthy.�He�was�too�busy�getting�another�campaign�prepared—this�time,�a
campaign�to�beat�cancer—and�then�using�it.�For�the�next�year,�he�wasn’t�advancing
his� economic� consulting� career,� as� he� had� planned;� he� was� undergoing� surgery,
radiation,�and�chemotherapy.�He�was�also�learning,�at�a�very�young�age,�just�how
fragile�life�is.
When�his�cancer�treatment�was�over�and�his�cancer�was�in�remission,�Reed�had
no� idea� what� to� do� next.� Actually,� he� had� one� idea—one� somewhat� crazy� idea.
There�was�this�little�item�on�his�Odyssey�Plan�that�he�hadn’t�begun�to�prototype:
taking�a�year�off�from�everything�and�being�a�ski�bum.�He�was�conflicted.�An�all-
American�boy�on�the�fast�track�to�success�just�doesn’t�take�a�year�off�to�become�a
ski�bum�and�get�nothing�done.
Reed,�however,�was�not�your�average�Boy�Scout�any�longer.�He�had�just�fought�a
war� with� cancer,� and� even� though� he� knew� the� smart� plan� was� to� go� back� to
building� his� career,� and� he� worried� that� an� additional� year� of� employment� gap
might�ruin�his�résumé�and�therefore�ruin�his�life,�Reed�decided�he�wanted�to�live
his�life,�not�just�plan�it.
He�did�some�prototype�conversations�with�businesspeople�before�he�made�his
decision,�because�he�wanted�to�learn�how�future�hiring�managers�might�look�at
that�decision,�and�concluded�that�he�could�afford�the�risk,�and�that�the�kind�of
people� he’d� want� to� work� with� would� view� his� post-cancer� ski� adventure� as� a
demonstration�of�boldness�rather�than�irresponsibility.�As�for�how�other�people
would� see� it—well,� that� was� their� problem.� The� point� isn’t� primarily� that� Reed
“succeeded� in� beating� cancer,”� but� that� he� was� able� to� enjoy� failure� immunity
during�the�process,�which�enabled�him�to�direct�his�energy�productively�and�to
learn�things�he�could�use�later.�By�turning�his�problem�into�an�advantage,�he�was
able�to�design�the�best�life�possible�in�the�face�of�adversity.�It�beats�the�hell�out�of
being�despondently�confused�about�why�bad�things�happen.
The�failure�immunity�he�began�learning�in�the�fifth�grade�just�kept�coming�in
handy.� A� few� years� later,� Reed� decided� to� go� for� his� dream� job—working� for� a
professional�sports�franchise,�in�particular�an�NFL�team.�Though�he�didn’t�have
any� family� connections� in� that� world,� he� had� met� an� up-and-coming� NFL
executive�while�in�college�and�had�been�slowly�building�a�network�into�the�sports
world� through� prototype� conversations.� He� made� some� overtures� into� the
industry,�looking�for�work.�The�worst�thing�that�could�happen�was�being�rejected,
but�with�rejection�no�longer�scary�to�him,�why�not�at�least�try?
When�his�attempts�at�an�NFL�job�failed,�he�let�go�and�quickly�redirected�his
efforts�into�his�next,�alternative�plan.
Over�a�year�later,�he�finally�got�a�chance�to�apply�for�a�job�negotiating�player
contracts�for�an�NFL�team.�Up�against�dozens�of�other�candidates,�many�of�whom
had�industry�experience,�he�made�it�down�to�the�final�two�and�lost—he�didn’t�get
the� job.� It� really� hurt,� but,� again,� he� quickly� redirected� his� efforts� into� an
alternative�plan,�and�he�got�a�job�in�financial�management,�working�for�a�great
company.
But� he� didn’t� give� up� on� the� pro� team.� Despite� being� rejected,� he� kept
prototyping� that� career.� He� stayed� in� touch� with� the� NFL� executives� and� spent
hundreds� of� hours� building� innovative� sports� analysis� models,� which� he� would
show�them�every�now�and�then.�This�was�not�the�usual�behavior�of�people�who
lost�a�job.�And,�yes,�he�was�eventually�hired�by�that�same�NFL�team,�for�a�better
job�than�the�one�he�had�originally�tried�for.
He� had� worked� there� for� about� three� years� when� he� decided� that� pro� sports
wasn’t�really�where�he�wanted�to�be—he�“failed”�again.�So�he�moved�on�to�a�health-
care�start-up,�secure�in�the�knowledge�that,�if�that�didn’t�work�out,�the�next�thing—
or,�barring�that,�the�thing�after�that—would.
Reed�is�now�completely�failure-immune.�He’s�not�protected�from�the�personal
pain�and�loss�of�failure,�but�he’s�immune�from�being�misinformed�by�failure—he
doesn’t�ever�believe�that�he�is�a�failure�or�that�failure�defines�him,�or,�in�fact,�that
his�failures�were�failures.�His�failures�educate�him�in�just�the�same�way�that�his
successes�do.�He�likes�success�better,�but�he’ll�take�whatever�he�gets�and�just�keep
failing�his�way�forward.
To�meet�Reed�today�is�to�meet�what�appears�in�every�way�to�be�a�very�successful
and�content�young�man.�He’s�happily�married,�with�a�beautiful�baby�girl�and�an
irrepressibly�delightful�three-year-old�son.�He’s�tall,�good-looking,�and�healthy.�He
and�his�wife�just�bought�their�first�house,�and�he’s�doing�well�at�a�great�young
company,�working�in�genetic�testing�and�health�care.�Reed�is�certainly�enjoying�all
his� recent� success,� but� he� doesn’t� think� of� it� in� those� terms.� He’s� mostly� just
grateful,�and�knows�that�how�well�it�feels�life�is�going�is�much�more�about�his
mind-set�than�his�current�level�of�success.
This�is�the�real�reason�why�Reed�is�winning�at�life.
Failure�Reframe�Exercise
It’s�easy�for�us�to�describe�the�lofty�goal�of�attaining�failure�immunity,�but�getting
there� is� another� matter.� Here’s� an� exercise� to� help� you� do� just� that—the� failure
reframe.�Failure�is�the�raw�material�of�success,�and�the�failure�reframe�is�a�process
of�converting�that�raw�material�into�real�growth.�It’s�a�simple�three-step�exercise:
1. Log�your�failures.
2. Categorize�your�failures.
3. Identify�growth�insights.
Log�Your�Failures
Just�write�down�when�you’ve�messed�up.�You�can�do�this�by�looking�back�over�the
last�week,�the�last�month,�the�last�year,�or�make�it�your�All-Time�Failure�Hits�List.
Any�time�frame�can�work.�If�you�want�to�build�the�habit�of�converting�failures�to
growth,�then�we�suggest�you�do�this�once�or�twice�a�month�until�you’ve�established
a� new� way� of� thinking.� Failure� reframe� is� a� healthy� habit� that� leads� to� failure
immunity.
Categorize�Your�Failures
It’s�useful�to�categorize�failures�into�three�types�so�you�can�more�easily�identify
where�the�growth�potential�lies.
Screwups�are�just�that—simple�mistakes�about�things�that�you�normally�get�right.
It’s�not�that�you�can’t�do�better.�You�normally�do�these�things�right,�so�you�don’t
really�need�to�learn�anything�from�this—you�just�screwed�up.�The�best�response
here�is�to�acknowledge�you�screwed�up,�apologize�as�needed,�and�move�on.
Weaknesses� are� failures� that� happen� because� of� one� of� your� abiding� failings.
These�are�the�mistakes�that�you�make�over�and�over.�You�know�the�source�of�these
failures� well.� They� are� old� friends.� You’ve� probably� worked� at� correcting� them
already,�and�have�improved�as�far�as�you�think�you’re�going�to.�You�try�to�avoid
getting� caught� by� these� weaknesses,� but� they� happen.� We’re� not� suggesting� you
cave�in�prematurely�and�accept�mediocre�performance,�but�we�are�suggesting�that
there�isn’t�much�upside�in�trying�to�change�your�stripes.�It’s�a�judgment�call,�of
course,�but�some�failures�are�just�part�of�your�makeup,�and�your�best�strategy�is
avoidance�of�the�situations�that�prompt�them�instead�of�improvement.
Growth�opportunities�are�the�failures�that�didn’t�have�to�happen,�or�at�least�don’t
have�to�happen�the�next�time.�The�cause�of�these�failures�is�identifiable,�and�a�fix�is
available.�We�want�to�direct�our�attention�here,�rather�than�get�distracted�by�the
low�return�on�spending�too�much�time�on�the�other�failure�types.
Identify�Growth�Insights
Do� any� of� the� growth� opportunity� failures� offer� an� invitation� for� a� real
improvement?�What�is�there�to�learn�here?�What�went�wrong�(the�critical�failure
factor)?�What�could�be�done�differently�next�time�(the�critical�success�factor)?�Look
for�an�insight�to�capture�that�could�change�things�next�time.�Jot�it�down�and�put�it
to�work.�That’s�it—a�simple�reframe.
Here�are�some�examples�from�Dave’s�almost�endlessly�long�failure�log.
Dave� did� actually� miss� his� daughter� Lisa’s� birthday.� By� exactly� a� week.� He
doesn’t�remember�this�sort�of�thing�well�at�all�(a�weakness),�so�he�uses�his�calendar
to�remind�himself.�But�one�year�he�accidentally�wrote�it�on�the�wrong�week.�He
carefully� planned� a� nice� birthday� dinner� out� with� her—seven� days� after� her
birthday.�He�managed�to�stay�in�the�dark�for�the�whole�week�by�being�on�the�road.
Total�screwup.�Weird�mistake.�Not�going�to�happen�again.�Another�awful�screwup
was�getting�robbed.�While�the�house�was�being�fumigated�for�termites,�Dave�and
his�wife�had�to�move�out�for�three�days,�during�which�time�thieves�broke�into�the
tented�house�and�stole�everything�of�value.�It�was�awful.�What�did�he�do�wrong?
He�didn’t�hire�a�private�guard�to�watch�the�house�for�three�days.�But�who�does
that?�The�police�said�it�was�a�very�odd�situation�(most�thieves�aren’t�willing�to�be
lethally�fumigated�to�get�your�TV�set),�and�all�of�Dave’s�friends�had�gone�through
getting�fumigated�without�even�hearing�about�hiring�a�guard.�Though�the�failure
had�been�preventable,�it�was�so�unusual�that�he�accepted�it�as�merely�a�screwup.
Huge,�painful,�and�expensive,�but—just�a�screwup.
Then�he�had�to�stay�up�half�the�night�(again)�to�get�his�budget�in�on�time�the
next� day.� Dave� is� a� famous� procrastinator.� He� has� lots� of� tricks� to� solve� this
persistent�failing,�and�they�work�a�good�7�percent�of�the�time.�He’s�learned�to�work
around�it�most�of�the�time�and�just�live�with�it�the�rest�of�the�time.�He�almost
never� misses� a� deadline—he� just� gets� to� stay� up� late� a� lot.� Big� deal.� There’s
apparently�not�much�left�to�learn�here.�Been�there,�still�doing�that.�It’s�a�weakness.
He�was�very�surprised�while�talking�on�the�phone�to�a�client�not�long�ago.�Dave
had�just�opened�the�conversation�with�a�marketing�question�about�the�project�they
were� working� on� when� the� client� lost� her� temper� and� started� yelling.� Dave� was
floored.� He’d� not� heard� that� the� key� engineer� on� the� project� had� quit� and
everything�was�in�shambles.�Though�it�was�the�scheduled�reason�for�his�call,�his
lengthy�opening�question�about�marketing�was�now�irrelevant,�and�the�client�was
furious�that�he�was�wasting�her�time.�That�is�not�the�sort�of�mistake�Dave�is�used�to
making.�He’s�actually�pretty�great�at�client�management,�and�talks�on�the�phone�a
few�dozen�hours�a�week.�So�what�happened�this�time?�As�he�thought�about�it,�he
realized�that�the�mistake�was�launching�right�into�the�agenda�of�the�call�without
checking�in�first.�Almost�all�Dave’s�calls�are�scheduled�with�an�agenda�topic�and�a
tight�time�frame.�He�usually�has�great�success�if�he�launches�into�the�agenda�right
away,�but�now�he�realized�that�he�never�does�that�when�he�meets�people�in�person.
In�a�live�meeting,�he�starts�with�a�checkin�to�see�how�the�person�is�and�what
news� has� developed� since� their� last� contact,� and� he� always� confirms� the� agenda
before�getting�down�to�business.�He�often�discovers�important�news�during�that
checkin,�but�he�stopped�doing�it�some�time�ago�on�the�phone,�in�the�interest�of
saving�time.�Skipping�it�was�clearly�a�risk;�he�just�hadn’t�gotten�caught�until�now.
The�insight�was�clear—do�a�quick�news-and-agenda�check,�even�in�phone�calls.�It
only�takes�a�few�seconds�and�can�make�a�huge�difference.
Dave�needed�less�time�to�analyze�those�five�failures�than�it�took�you�to�read
about�them.�This�exercise�is�not�hard,�but�it�can�bring�big�rewards.�If�Dave�had�just
left�that�bad�phone�call�saying,�“Sheesh!�What’s�her�problem,�anyway?,”�he’d�have
learned�nothing�and�would�still�be�at�risk�of�doing�it�again.�Similarly,�if�he’d�not
thought�about�what�led�to�that�awful�robbery�or�blowing�his�daughter’s�birthday,
he� would� still� be� beating� himself� up� about� those� situations� needlessly—to� no
productive�end.
A� little� failure� reframing� can� go� a� long� way� to� building� up� your� failure
immunity.�Give�it�a�try.
Don’t�Fight�Reality
Even�if�you�have�your�dream�job�and�your�dream�life,�stuff�will�still�hit�the�fan.
Designers� know� a� lot� about� how� things� don’t� work� out� as� planned.� When� you
understand�who�you�are,�design�your�life,�and�then�go�live�your�life,�you�cannot
fail.�It�does�not�mean�that�you�won’t�stumble�or�that�a�particular�prototype�will
always� work� as� expected.� But� failure� immunity� comes� from� knowing� that� a
prototype�that�did�not�work�still�leaves�you�with�valuable�information�about�the
state�of�the�world�here—at�your�new�starting�point.�When�obstacles�happen,�when
your�progress�gets�derailed,�when�the�prototype�changes�unexpectedly—life�design
lets�you�turn�absolutely�any�change,�setback,�or�surprise�into�something�that�can
contribute�to�who�you�are�becoming�personally�and�professionally.
Life� designers� don’t� fight� reality.� They� become� tremendously� empowered� by
designing� their� way� forward� no� matter� what.� In� life� design,� there� are� no� wrong
choices;� there� are� no� regrets.� There� are� just� prototypes,� some� that� succeed� and
some� that� fail.� Some� of� our� greatest� learning� comes� from� a� failed� prototype,
because� then� we� know� what� to� build� differently� next� time.� Life� is� not� about
winning�and�losing.�It’s�about�learning�and�playing�the�infinite�game,�and�when
we�approach�our�lives�as�designers,�we�are�constantly�curious�to�discover�what�will
happen�next.
The� only� question� that� remains� is� one� we’ve� all� heard� a� time� or� two� before:
What�would�you�do�if�you�knew�you�could�not�fail?
Try�Stuff
Reframing�Failure
1. Using�the�worksheet�below�(or�downloading�it�from�www.designi
ngyour.life),�look�back�over�the�last�week�(or�month�or�year),�and
log�your�failures.
2. Categorize�them�as�screwups,�weaknesses,�or�growth
opportunities.
3. Identify�your�growth�insights.
4. Build�a�habit�of�converting�failures�to�growth�by�doing�this�once
or�twice�a�month.
11
Building�a�Team
Every�great�design�was�made�great�because�there�was�a�design�team�that�brought
that�project,�product,�or�building�to�life.�Designers�believe�in�radical�collaboration
because�true�genius�is�a�collaborative�process.�We�design�our�lives�in�collaboration
and�connection�with�others,�because�we�is�always�stronger�than�I—it’s�as�simple�as
that.
Dysfunctional�Belief:�It’s�my�life,�I�have�to�design�it�myself.
Reframe:�You�live�and�design�your�life�in�collaboration�with�others.
When�you�design�your�life,�you�are�engaging�in�an�act�of�co-creation.�When�you
use� design� thinking,� the� mind-set� is� completely� different� from� “career
development”�or�“strategic�planning”�or�even�“life�coaching.”�One�key�difference
is�the�role�of�community.�If�you’re�the�sole�architect�of�your�brilliant�future,�then
you�think�the�whole�thing�up�and�you�heroically�bring�it�into�being—it’s�all�about
you.� Life� design� is� about� your� life,� but� it’s� not� all� about� you—it’s� all� about� us.
When�we�say�we�can’t�do�this�alone,�we�don’t�just�mean�that�we’d�like�to�do�it
ourselves�but�we’re�insufficient,�so�we�have�to�go�get�some�helpers.�What�we�mean
is�that�life�design�is�intrinsically�a�communal�effort.�When�you�are�wayfinding�a
step�or�two�at�a�time�to�build�(not�solve)�your�way�forward,�the�process�has�to�rely
on�the�contribution�and�participation�of�others.�The�ideas�and�opportunities�you
design�are�not�just�presented�to�you�or�fetched�for�you�by�others�on�your�behalf—
they�are�co-created�with�you�in�collaboration�with�the�whole�community�of�players
you�engage�with�in�life.�Whether�they�think�of�it�this�way�or�not,�all�the�people
you�meet,�engage,�prototype,�or�converse�with�along�the�way�are�in�your�design
community.� A� few� particularly� important� people� will� become� your� core
collaborators�and�play�a�crucial�and�ongoing�part�in�your�life�design,�but�everyone
matters.
Everyone.
Co-creation�is�an�integral�aspect�of�a�design�point�of�view,�and�it’s�a�key�reason
that�design�thinking�works.�Your�life�design�isn’t�in�you;�it’s�in�the�world,�where
you�will�discover�and�co-create�it�with�others.�The�ideas�and�possibilities�and�roles
and� forms� that� you� will� end� up� living� do� not� actually� exist� anywhere� in� the
universe�right�now,�as�you�are�reading�this.�They�are�all�waiting�to�be�invented,�and
the�raw�material�to�invent�them�is�found�out�in�the�world�and,�most�important,
lying�in�wait�in�the�hearts�and�minds�and�actions�of�others—many�of�whom�you’ve
not�met�yet.�A�big�reason�so�many�traditional�approaches�to�doing�this�sort�of
work�are�unsuccessful�is�that�they’re�based�on�the�false�perception�that�you�(and
you� alone)� know� the� answers,� you� have� the� resources,� and� you� know� the� right
passion� to� follow� in� order� to� have� it� all.� You� know� the� kind� of� thinking� we’re
talking�about�here—the�kind�that�says�you�should�set�some�good�goals�and�go�get
it.�It�sounds�like�the�locker�room�at�halftime:�“Get�out�there!�You�can�do�it!”
We�say�that’s�nuts.
Think�about�Ellen,�Janine,�and�Donald�from�our�introduction.�They�had�goals.
Janine�and�Donald�had�accomplished�many�of�their�goals,�and�quite�successfully.
But�both�of�them�were�lost�in�their�own�ways—wondering�why�they�weren’t�happy
with�their�choices,�wondering�which�direction�to�go�next,�and�not�knowing�how�to
make�the�actual�living�of�their�lives�matter�in�a�way�that�made�sense.�And�all�three
of�them�believed�they�had�to�figure�it�out�all�alone.�They�weren’t�designing�their
lives,�and�they�weren’t�using�a�team.
If� you� find� yourself� standing� alone� in� front� of� the� mirror� trying� to� solve� or
figure�out�your�life,�waiting�to�make�a�move�until�you�are�clear�about�the�correct
answers,�you’re�going�to�be�waiting�a�long�time.
Look�away�from�the�mirror,�and�look�at�the�people�around�you.�If�you’ve�been
doing�the�work�and�the�exercises�suggested�throughout�this�book,�you’ve�already
engaged�lots�of�people—many�of�whom�you�just�met.�You�talked�to�others�honestly
about� your� current� situation,� your� values,� your� Workview� and� Lifeview.� You’ve
identified�groups�and�individuals�who�are�part�of�your�energy-producing�activities
in�your�Good�Time�Journal.�You�probably�had�some�helpers�for�ideating�or�getting
feedback�on�your�alternative�life�plans.�People�appear�in�every�single�one�of�your
prototypes� as� collaborators,� participants,� and� informers.� You� may� not� have
thought� of� all� these� people� as� being� a� part� of� your� team.� You� may� have� just
thought�of�them�as�the�people�who�were�there�when�you�were�doing�or�trying�stuff.
That�would�be�missing�the�point.
They�are�part�of�your�team.
Identifying�Your�Team
Everyone�participating�in�your�life�design�effort�in�one�way�or�another�should�be
thought�of�as�being�a�part�of�your�team,�but�there�are�different�roles�to�be�played,
and�it’s�useful�to�name�them.�And,�yes,�of�course,�certain�individuals�will�appear�in
more�than�one�of�these�roles:
Supporters.� Supporters� come� in� all� flavors,� ages,� proximities,� and� sizes.
Supporters�are�just�those�go-to�people�you�can�count�on�to�care�about�your�life—
people�close�enough�to�you�that�their�encouragement�helps�keep�you�going�and
their�feedback�is�of�real�use.�Most�of�your�supporters�are�people�you�think�of�as
your� friends,� but� not� all� friends� are� supporters,� and� some� supporters� are� not
friends�(they�are�there�for�you�in�your�life�design,�but�you�don’t�hang�out�with
them).�How�many�supporters�you�have�is�largely�a�result�of�your�personality—this
group�may�range�from�two�or�three�to�fifty�or�even�a�hundred.
Players.�Players�are�the�active�participants�in�your�life�design�projects—especially
your�ongoing�work-related�and�avocational�projects�and�prototypes.�These�are�the
people�you�actually�do�things�with,�your�co-workers�in�the�classic�sense.
Intimates.�Intimates�include�your�immediate�and�close�extended�family�members
and�your�closest�friends.�These�are�likely�the�people�most�directly�affected�by�your
life�design,�and,�whether�or�not�they�are�actively�involved�with�your�life�design
project,�they�are�the�most�influential�people�in�it.�We�encourage�you�at�least�to
keep�your�intimates�informed,�if�not�directly�involved,�in�your�life�design�work.
These�people�are�a�big�part�of�your�life,�so�don’t�leave�them�out.�What�role�to�have
them� play� in� your� ideation,� planning,� and� prototyping� can� be� tricky.� Some� of
them�may�be�too�close.�Some�of�them�may�have�a�preference�for�a�certain�result�so
well�established�that�they�can’t�be�objective.�And,�of�course,�some�of�them�are�the
best�helpers�you�could�possibly�ask�for.�All�we’re�saying�is�that�you�recognize�how
important�these�people�are�and�figure�out�an�effective�and�appropriate�role�for
them.�Do�try�to�avoid�the�mistake�of�leaving�them�completely�out�of�it�until�the
end.�That�seldom�works�out�well,�for�a�lot�of�reasons�you�can�probably�imagine.
Surprising�your�wife�with�the�fact�that�you’re�prototyping�living�off�the�grid�for
the�next�year�is�not�going�to�land�well.
The�Team.�These�are�the�people�with�whom�you’re�sharing�the�specifics�of�your
life�design�project�and�who�will�track�with�you�on�that�project�over�time�at�regular
intervals.� The� most� likely� candidates� for� your� team� are� among� the� people� you
invited�to�your�feedback�session�to�present�and�discuss�your�three�alternative�five-
year�Odyssey�Plans.
You�need�a�group�of�people�to�walk�alongside�you�as�you�are�doing�your�life
design.�They�don’t�have�to�be�your�best�friends.�They�just�need�to�be�willing�to
show�up�for�you,�to�be�helpfully�attentive�and�reflective�with�you,�and�to�respect
and�care�about�the�process—but�not�full�of�answers�and�advice.
You�know�the�kind�of�folks�we�mean;�their�faces�are�already�coming�to�mind.�A
healthy� team� is� more� than� two� people� and� not� more� than� six,� including� you;
optimally,�your�team�would�be�three�to�five�people.�Just�one�person�can�be�a�great
partner�or�an�accountability�buddy,�but�two�people�make�a�pair,�not�a�team.�In�a
pair,� there’s� always� one� speaker� and� one� listener.� A� hundred� percent� of� the
response�to�what’s�just�been�said�is�on�the�shoulders�of�the�other�person.�A�pair
does� not� create� enough� diversity� of� opinion� for� the� kind� of� collaboration� you
need.
When�there�are�three�people�in�the�circle,�a�much�more�active�dynamic�is�at
play,�and�a�truly�wide-ranging�conversation�can�ensue.�That�process�continues�up
to� maybe� even� six� people,� and� then� it� starts� to� shift� again.� Beyond� six� people,
there’s� limited� airtime� for� each� participant.� Who� speaks� next� becomes� an� issue.
Since�everyone’s�time�is�limited�and�we�hear�less�from�each�person,�roles�start�to
form.�Ann�becomes�the�practical�one;�Theo�is�always�defending�your�creative�side.
On� bigger� teams,� each� person� gets� stuck� in� a� persona,� and� the� conversation
shrinks.�So,�again,�try�to�build�a�team�of�three�to�five�people�for�the�best�dynamics
and�most�innovative�input�(and�just�one�extra-large�pizza�will�do�for�team�sessions
—and�that’s�always�a�plus).
Team�Roles�and�Rules
First� of� all,� keep� it� simple.� The� team’s� focus� is� on� supporting� an� effective� life
design—no� more� and� no� less.� The� team� members� are� not� your� therapist,� your
financial� adviser,� or� your� spiritual� guru.� They� are� your� co-creators� in� your� life
design.�The�only�role�that�really�needs�to�be�defined�is�that�of�the�team�facilitator—
the�person�who�organizes�when�you�get�together�and�what�you�do�when�you�meet.
Usually,�that’s�you.�It’s�best�if�you�drive�the�scheduling�and�communications;�that
way,�you�can�be�sure�the�team�is�on�track�and�not�doing�too�much�or�too�little.
But�you�may�ask�another�member�to�actually�facilitate�the�meetings,�or�you�may
pass�that�role�around.�It�doesn’t�really�matter,�as�long�as�someone�is�always�keeping
an�eye�on�the�clock,�the�agenda,�and�the�conversation.
That� last� part—the� conversation—is� the� most� important.� The� role� is� to� be� a
facilitator,�not�a�boss�or�a�referee�or�a�“leader.”�You�don’t�need�any�of�those.�You
just�want�someone�to�participate�in�the�conversation�and�also�attend�to�how�it’s
going—making�sure�that�everyone�is�heard�from�and�that�key�ideas�and�suggestions
aren’t� lost� in� the� noise,� and� helping� the� team� determine� which� path� to� follow
when�multiple�issues�or�considerations�present�themselves�at�once�(which�happens
a�lot).�As�far�as�rules�go,�we�use�just�four�in�our�Stanford�teams�(which�we�call
sections).
Keep�it:
1. Respectful
2. Confidential
3. Participative�(no�holding�back)
4. Generative�(constructive,�not�skeptical�or�judging)
Calling�All�Mentors
Mentors� play� a� very� special� role� in� your� life� design� community� or� team.� Not
everyone�reading�this�book�has�had�access�to�a�good�mentoring�experience,�but
some�of�you�have,�and�we�urge�everyone�to�try�to�find�it.�Your�life�design�effort
will� be� greatly� enhanced� if� you’ve� got� a� few� mentors� participating� with� you.
Mentoring�has�become�popular�in�recent�years,�and�here�are�a�few�things�we’ve
discovered� about� mentoring� that� have� been� most� helpful� to� our� students� and
clients.
Counsel� and� Advice.� We� make� a� clear� distinction� between� counsel� and� advice.
“Counsel”� is� when� someone� is� trying� to� help� you� figure� out� what� you� think.
“Advice”�is�when�someone�is�telling�you�what�he�or�she�thinks.�Fortunately,�there’s
a�very�easy�way�to�tell�when�you’re�getting�advice�rather�than�counsel.
When�someone�says,�“Well…If�I�were�you,�I�would�blah,�blah,�blah”—anytime
you� hear� “If� I� were� you”—you’re� getting� advice.� When� someone� says,� “If� I� were
you,”�what�he�really�means�is�“If�you�were�me.”�See,�that’s�the�point�of�advice—
telling�you�to�do�in�your�life�what�the�adviser�would�do�in�your�situation.�Well,
that’s�great�if�you�happen�to�be�identical�to�the�person�giving�the�advice.�If�you�are
a�genetic�twin,�go�for�it.�Otherwise,�we�seldom�find�ourselves�advising�people�who
are�just�like�us.�Advice�is�fine�to�get—you�just�want�to�be�very�careful�about�actually
taking�it.�If�you’re�getting�advice,�try�to�find�out�the�adviser’s�values�and�priorities
and� point� of� view,� and� what� key� experiences� informed� the� evolution� of� her
conviction�about�that�advice.
We�know�an�ER�doctor�who�emphatically�advises�everyone,�“Don’t�ever�ride�a
motorcycle—you’ll�just�become�an�organ�donor!”�From�a�person�who�sees�lots�of
motorcycle�accident�victims�come�into�her�ER,�and�too�many�of�them�dead�of
brain�injuries,�that’s�very�understandable�and�rational�advice.�But�we�also�know�a
fine�artist�on�the�East�Coast�whose�inspirations�for�his�very�successful�oil�paintings
have� all� come� from� his� up-close� encounters� while� motorcycling� around� the
country� for� thirty� to� a� hundred� thousand� miles� a� year—for� thirty� years.� He’s
convinced�that�the�best�way�to�see�the�world�and�meet�the�people�in�it�is�from�the
back�of�a�motorcycle�(an�old-school�flathead�Harley-Davidson,�preferably).�They’re
both� right:� Motorcycles� are� much� more� dangerous� than� cars.� Motorcycling� is� a
great�way�to�see�the�countryside�and�meet�people.�Both�are�true.�What’s�important
is,�how�does�that�advice�relate�to�you?
Good�advice�comes�from�people�who�have�indisputable�expertise.�You�want�an
expert�to�advise�you�on�filing�your�taxes,�or�whether�you�should�have�surgery�or
just�physical�therapy�for�that�bum�knee.�There�is�no�expert�adviser�for�your�life.
People�will�sometimes�say,�“I�got�bad�advice.”�That’s�probably�not�true;�they�just
got�good�advice�that�didn’t�fit.�Lots�of�people�will�be�ready�to�give�you�advice�on
your�life.�Be�very�careful�about�that.
Counsel�is�entirely�different.�Counsel�is�always�helpful.�You�can�never�be�too
clear�on�your�own�thinking.�You�can�never�get�too�good�a�grasp�of�your�own�best
wisdom�and�insights.�Finding�someone�who�can�give�you�good�counsel�and�who
regularly�leaves�you�in�a�clearer�and�more�settled�state�of�mind�is�a�great�asset.�This
is� where� good� mentors� shine.� We� would� say� that� all� legitimate� mentoring� is
centered�on�giving�counsel.�Counsel�invariably�begins�with�lots�of�questions�aimed
at� accurately� understanding� you,� what� you’re� saying,� and� what� you’re� going
through.�Good�counselors�will�often�seem�to�ask�the�same�question�a�couple�of
times�from�different�points�of�view,�to�be�sure�they’re�getting�it.�They�will�often�try
to�summarize�or�restate�something�you’ve�said�and�ask,�“Did�I�get�that�right?”�This
approach�tells�you�that�they’re�focused�on�you—not�on�themselves.
The�value�of�mentors’�life�experience�when�they�are�giving�counsel�lies�not�in
borrowing�what�facts�or�answers�they�know�but�in�accessing�the�breadth�of�their
experience�and�their�objectivity,�which�helps�them�to�help�you�to�see�your�own
reality� in� a� new� way.� Good� mentors� spend� most� of� their� time� listening,� then
offering�possible�reframings�of�your�situation�that�allow�you�to�have�new�ideas�and
come�up�with�the�answers�that�will�work�for�you.
Of�course,�this�is�just�our�advice.
Discernment.� We� talked� about� discernment� in� chapter� 9,� when� we� discussed
making� good� decisions� by� employing� multiple� ways� of� knowing.� Mentors� can
make�a�particularly�valuable�contribution�to�your�discernment�process�when�it’s
time�to�make�choices.�Important�decisions�are�seldom�easy,�and�there�are�lots�of
competing� issues� and� trade-off� considerations� that� conspire� to� make� it� awfully
noisy�in�your�head.�When�you’ve�got�a�noisy�brain,�that’s�a�great�time�to�connect
with�a�mentor�who�can�counsel�you.�The�mentor�can�listen�to�you�dump�out�all
the�stuff�going�on�inside�you�and�help�you�to�make�sense�of�it�all,�sorting�it�into
the�big�stuff,�the�small�stuff,�and�the�irrelevant�stuff.�A�good�mentor�will�do�this
with�some�care,�and�even�some�trepidation.�Sorting�and�prioritizing�issues�often
comes�very�close�to�pointing�someone�toward�a�preferred�choice.�A�good�mentor
will�resist�telling�you�what�to�do,�or�will�at�least�be�explicitly�cautious�about�the
risks�of�overinfluencing�you.�She�might�say,�“Well,�look,�I’m�really�not�trying�to
tell�you�that�I�think�the�right�thing�is�to�take�that�promotion�and�move�to�Beijing
for�a�year,�but�I�do�notice�that�every�time�you�talk�about�China�you�light�up�and
you�smile.�Have�you�noticed�that?�If�so,�you�probably�should�just�take�a�look�at
that.� I’m� not� saying� go� to� China;� I� just� think� there’s� something� there� worth
noticing.”
The�Long�View�and�the�Local�View.�Mentors�come�in�lots�of�forms.�Some�people�are
fortunate�enough�to�find�a�lifelong�mentor,�someone�who�really�cares�about�their
lives�and�is�committed�to�walking�with�them�throughout�their�journey�for�years
and�years.�But�that’s�not�the�only�kind�of�valuable�mentor.�You�can�find�topical
mentors� (parenting,� finances,� spirituality,� etc.),� and� you� can� find� ad� hoc� or
seasonal�mentors�(getting�through�the�pregnancy,�handling�your�first�managerial
role,�dealing�with�elderly�parents,�moving�to�Costa�Rica).�There�really�are�no�rules
here—just�be�on�the�lookout�for�people�who�can�provide�mentoring�assistance�to
you.
Now,� you’re� probably� wondering� where� you� are� going� to� find� all� these� great
mentors.�(If�you’re�not,�then�skip�this�part;�you�are�one�of�the�lucky�ones�who�are
well�stocked�with�mentors.)�We�suggest�that�there�are�many�more�people�capable�of
giving� good� mentoring� than� there� are� good� mentors.� Lots� of� people� with
significant�life�experience�and�the�willingness�to�listen�and�provide�counsel�(not
just�advice)�are�out�there,�but�many�of�them�don’t�think�of�themselves�as�mentors,
or�aren’t�skilled�in�the�practice�of�a�mentoring�conversation.�It’s�not�that�these
people�aren’t�mentors—they�are�just�not�what�we�call�master�mentors.
This�is�where�being�a�good�mentee�comes�in.�You�don’t�need�100�percent�master
mentors.�Sure,�master�mentors�are�great,�and�if�you’ve�got�some,�hang�on�to�them.
But�all�you�really�need�are�mentor-capable�people�from�whom�you�can�extract�a
mentor�contribution.�It’s�surprisingly�easy�to�do.�You�just�have�to�be�the�initiator.
When�you�identify�someone�who�you�think�can�serve�you�as�a�mentor,�find�a�way
to�spend�some�time�with�the�person�and�direct�the�conversation�to�the�areas�in
which�you�want�help.�Specifically,�ask�him�not�so�much�to�tell�you�what�he’d�do�as
to�use�his�insights�and�experience�to�try�to�help�you�sort�out�your�own�thinking.
“Hey,�Harold.�I�really�appreciate�the�way�you�and�Louise�have�raised�your�kids,
and,�frankly,�this�whole�father�thing�scares�the�heck�outta�me.�Could�I�buy�you�a
cup�of�coffee�just�to�hear�some�of�your�stories�about�that�sometime?”
Of�course,�Harold�will�say�yes�(and,�yes,�this�approach�is�strikingly�similar�to
how�we�set�up�a�prototype�conversation�in�chapter�6).�When�you�get�together,�after
you�have�Harold�tell�you�some�of�the�endearing�and�some�of�the�scary�fathering
moments�he�recalls,�you�just�ask,�“I�wonder�if�you�could�do�this�for�me.�I’ve�got�a
situation�brewing�with�Skippy,�and�Lucy�and�I�are�kind�of�flummoxed�about�it.
What�if�I�just�tell�you�what�we’ve�got�on�our�minds,�and�maybe�you�could�help�me
hear�my�own�best�thoughts�on�this?�I�think�Skippy�is�pretty�different�from�any�of
your� and� Louise’s� kids,� but� you’ve� got� a� practiced� father’s� ear,� and� maybe� you
could�help�me�sort�out�the�majors�from�the�minors�of�what�we’re�dealing�with
here.”
That�may�be�a�different�role�from�anything�Harold�is�used�to,�but�he’ll�give�it
his� best� shot� and� probably� do� pretty� well.� If� he� veers� into� advice,� just� listen
respectfully� and� come� back� to� the� request.� He’ll� probably� get� it;� if� he� doesn’t,
nothing� lost� and� you� can� try� someone� else.� This� way,� you� can� build� your� own
stable�of�mentors�without�having�to�wait�for�one�of�the�master�mentors�to�appear
on�the�horizon.
Beyond�Team�to�Community
If�you’re�like�most�of�the�people�we’ve�worked�with,�you’ll�find�the�time�you�spend
with�your�Life�Design�Team�and�collaborators�to�be�pretty�stimulating�and�life-
giving.�The�kind�of�support�and�sincere�and�respectful�listening�that�we’re�hoping
you’re�experiencing�as�you�do�this�are�pretty�habit-forming.�There�is�something
incredibly�special�about�being�part�of�a�community.�It’s�how�humans�are�supposed
to�live.
Community�is�more�than�just�sharing�resources�or�hanging�out�now�and�then.
It’s�showing�up�and�investing�in�the�ongoing�creation�of�one�another’s�lives.�Being
in�that�kind�of�community�is�a�great�way�to�live,�and�we�highly�recommend�it�as
an�ongoing�practice,�not�just�when�making�big�plans�or�starting�new�things.
Identifying�what�sustaining�practices�will�help�keep�you�growing�and�enjoying
your�well-designed�life�is�an�important�part�of�the�formula,�and�community�is�an
important�piece.
So�what�exactly�do�we�mean�by�a�“community”�when�we’re�talking�about�an
ongoing�experience,�not�just�your�ad�hoc�Life�Design�Team?�Once�upon�a�time,�a
majority� of� people� found� themselves� organically� located� in� a� community.� They
were�raised�in�a�church�or�a�faith�tradition.�They�were�part�of�a�large�extended
family�that�actively�gathered�regularly�and�in�particular�ways.�They�may�have�been
participants� in� a� career,� such� as� the� military,� or� an� avocation,� such� as� rock
climbing,�that�brought�a�community�with�it.�But�today�most�people�do�not�have�a
ready-made� community—a� place� to� return� to� regularly� where� they� can� have� this
kind�of�life�conversation.�To�find�a�“community”�as�we�intend�it,�you’re�looking
for�a�group�of�people�that�shares�most�of�the�following�attributes:
Kindred� Purpose.� Healthy� communities� are� about� something—not� just� getting
together� to� get� together.� Dave’s� community� exists� to� become� people� of� greater
integrity� in� living� out� their� faith� in� all� aspects� of� their� lives.� Bill’s� community
gathers� to� support� one� another� in� becoming� better� fathers� and� more� authentic
men.�The�most�effective�communities�have�an�explicit�mission�that�keeps�them
directed�and�moving.�It’s�just�much�easier�to�keep�moving�if�you’re�moving�toward
something.�Both�Bill’s�and�Dave’s�communities�veer�into�all�manner�of�other�stuff
—social�activities,�recreational�events,�and�the�like—but�there�is�always�that�North
Star�pulling�them�back�to�“why�we’re�here.”
Meets� Regularly.�Whether�at�the�same�time�every�week�or�month�or�quarter�or
not,� the� community� must� meet� regularly.� It� must� gather� frequently� enough� to
sustain� a� consistent,� ongoing� conversation� in� which� the� members� can� pick� up
where� they� left� off� last� time� without� starting� all� over� again� and� again.� The� real
intention�here�is�that�participation�in�the�community�becomes�a�practice�in�and�of
itself.� The� community� isn’t� just� gathering� for� the� ad� hoc� purpose� of� getting� a
project� done� or� finishing� reading� the� book� together—it� gathers� because� its
participants� agree� that� a� life� lived� in� a� community-supported� way� is� a� better
designed�life,�and�they�stick�with�it.�Neither�of�us�could�have�ended�up�in�the�lives
we�now�live�had�it�not�been�for�the�ongoing�practice�of�this�kind�of�community.
Shared�Ground.�If�possible,�in�addition�to�a�kindred�purpose,�it’s�helpful�to�have
other�shared�ground.�This�is�usually�in�the�form�of�values�or�point�of�view.�In
Bill’s�dads’�discussion�group,�most�of�the�guys�share�the�hope�of�being�better�dads
than�they�had�themselves;�they�are�committed�to�total�honesty�(there’s�a�No�BS
rule);�and�they�all�are�willing�to�try�new�things�and�“do�the�work,”�including�trying
crazy�exercises—such�as�asking�someone�to�play�dead,�then�talking�about�him�as�if
they� were� at� his� funeral.� As� long� as� you’re� alive� it’s� not� too� late� to� revise� the
potential�content�of�your�eulogy,�so�each�member�listens�and�can�then�decide�if�he
likes� who� he’s� become� or� not.� This� explicit� shared� ground� keeps� the� group
together,� keeps� the� conversation� going,� and� acts� as� a� means� of� establishing
priorities�and�mediating�issues�as�the�group�journeys�together.�Even�though� no
more�than�a�shared�affection�(“getting�along�well”)�and�a�willingness�to�participate
may�be�enough�to�get�started,�we’ve�seldom�seen�that�be�enough�to�hold�people
together�for�the�long�haul.
To�Know�and�Be�Known.�Some�groups�are�all�about�the�content�or�the�process,�and
some�groups�are�all�about�the�people.�We�are�talking�about�a�community�that’s�at
least�in�large�part�about�the�people.�You�can�be�in�a�really�great�book�club,�where
people�do�the�reading�and�show�up�prepared�and�have�thoughtful�discussions�on
writing,�narrative,�and�the�state�of�civil�society�plus�a�little�wine�tasting�on�the�side,
and�you�all�really�like�one�another,�and�it’s�great.�But�that’s�not�a�community�as�we
mean�it.�It�really�is�great—don’t�get�us�wrong.�It�has�a�purpose�(informed�book
discussions),� it� has� shared� ground� (reading� novels� makes� us� more� interesting,
thoughtful,�and�open-minded),�and�it�meets�regularly�(first�Tuesday�of�the�month)
—but�we�aren’t�engaged�in�one�another’s�lives,�and�we�don’t�actually�have�to�know
one�another�at�all�to�make�the�community�work.�That�great�book�club�would�not
likely�be�a�place�to�have�this�conversation.�A�community�doesn’t�have�to�be�made�up
entirely�of�intimates,�but�there�should�be�some�level�of�personal�disclosure�about
what�each�person�is�up�to�and�how�it’s�going.
What�makes�an�effective�community�is�not�having�people�in�it�with�the�right
expertise�or�information.�What�makes�it�work�is�people�with�the�right�intention
and�presence.�It�is�most�helpful�to�be�with�people�who�are�trying�to�connect�the
dots�and�live�in�coherence�with�themselves�and�the�world�in�an�honest�way.�Being
around�a�dentist�who�is�doing�a�sincere�job�of�turning�into�her�best�self�is�more
encouraging� and� impactful,� despite� your� being� totally� uninterested� in� dentistry,
than�being�in�community�with�someone�who�has�exactly�the�same�interests�and
career� aspirations� as� you� but� who� isn’t� being� sincerely� present� and� engaging
honestly� with� his� hopes� and� struggles.� You� don’t� need� everyone� to� strip
emotionally�naked,�but�you�want�a�group�in�which�you’re�going�to�be�known�and
you’re� going� to� know� others� at� a� level� where� you� feel� like� you’re� all� in� this
together.
Here’s� a� way� to� test� what� we� mean.� Think� of� the� different� groups� you’ve
participated� in� over� the� years.� You� can� probably� think� of� groups� in� which� the
people�were�talking�about�ideas�about�their�lives,�and�groups�in�which�the�people
were�actually�talking�about�their�lives.�It’s�the�difference�between�commentators
and�participants.�It’s�a�community�of�participants�that�you’re�looking�for.
Our�hope�for�this�book�is�that�it�will�help�you�find�or�create�such�a�community.
By�all�means,�read�it�at�your�next�book�club,�but�then�find�those�who�are�willing�to
go�on�this�journey�with�you.�Life�design�is�a�journey,�and�it’s�really�not�as�much
fun�to�travel�alone.
For�now,�we�want�you�to�know�that�we�consider�you�part�of�our�team,�and�invite
you�to�be�a�part�of�our�community.�Find�out�how�to�do�that�here�(www.design
ingyour.life).
Try�Stuff
Building�a�Team
1. Make�a�list�of�three�to�five�people�who�might�be�a�part�of�your�Life
Design�Team.�Think�of�your�supporters,�your�intimates,�your
mentors�or�possible�mentors.�Ideally,�these�will�be�three�to�five
people�also�actively�engaged�in�designing�their�lives.
2. Make�sure�everyone�has�a�copy�of�the�book�(or�buy�books�for
everyone),�so�all�the�members�of�your�team�understand�how�life
design�works�and�have�reviewed�the�team�roles�and�rules.
3. Agree�to�meet�regularly�and�actively�to�co-create�a�well-designed
life�as�a�community.
Conclusion
A�Well-Designed�Life
What� does� a� well-designed� and� balanced� life� look� like?� Imagine� a� day� cut� into
perfectly�equal�pieces�of�pie—one�slice�for�career,�one�slice�for�play�and�fun,�one
slice�for�family�and�friends,�one�slice�for�health.�What�is�your�perfect�pie?�We�all
know�the�areas�of�our�lives�that�are�in�need�of�a�little�more�time�and�effort,�and
could� benefit� from� a� little� more� design� thinking� and� a� little� less� worry,
rumination,�and�should’ve/would’ve/could’ve�thinking.
Now,�how�much�of�your�day�today�did�you�actually�spend�having�some�fun?
Advancing�your�career?�Nurturing�your�relationships?�Taking�care�of�your�health?
Prototyping�what’s�next?�What�does�your�pie�really�look�like?
Let�us�tell�you�a�little�secret.�There�is�no�perfect�pie.�It�is�virtually�impossible�on
any� given� day� to� devote� yourself� equally� to� all� the� areas� of� your� life� that� are
important�to�you.
Balance�happens�over�time.
Life�design�happens�over�time.
Bill�Gates,�the�world’s�richest�man�(as�of�2015),�did�not�get�that�way�by�having
work/love�balance�on�any�given�day.�When�he�launched�Microsoft�Windows�in
1985� and� took� the� company� public� in� 1986,� no� one� would� have� called� him� a
philanthropist� doing� good�in� the� world.�And� it’s� also� probably� safe�to� say� that
back�in�1998�he�wasn’t�spending�an�equal�part�of�his�day�nurturing�relationships
and� an� equal� part� defending� government� charges� against� him� for� abusing
monopoly�power.
Balance�is�a�myth,�and�it�causes�a�lot�of�grief�and�heartache�for�most�of�us.
As�we�said�earlier,�we�don’t�fight�reality,�and�living�in�reality�means�looking�at
and�accepting�where�you�are�right�now.�Life�design�is�really�about�being�able�to
answer�the�question�“How’s�it�going?”
It�is�possible�to�design�your�life�in�such�a�way�that�when�those�closest�to�you�are
giving�your�eulogy�they�will�say,�“Overall,�he�had�a�pretty�evenly�sliced�pie.”
Okay,�so�maybe�you�don’t�want�someone�to�say�exactly�that�in�your�eulogy,�but
you�get�the�idea.�We�know�we�don’t�want�someone�to�stand�up�at�our�funerals�and
say,� “Dave� had� good� written� and� verbal� communication� skills.”� Or� “Bill� really
demonstrated�the�ability�to�juggle�competing�priorities�and�move�quickly.”�Life�is
about� more� than� a� paycheck� and� job� performance.� We� all� want� to� know� we
mattered�to�someone.�We�all�want�to�know�our�work�contributed�to�the�world.�We
all�want�to�know�we�loved�and�we�lived�the�best�we�could,�with�as�much�purpose
and�meaning�as�possible,�and�that�we�had�a�pretty�fun�time�doing�it.
And�you�only�understand�that�in�retrospect,�because�a�well-designed�life�isn’t�a
noun—it’s�a�verb�(technically�it�is�a�noun�phrase�but�you�know�what�we�mean).
Dysfunctional�Belief:�I�finished�designing�my�life;�the�hard�work�is�done,�and
everything�will�be�great.
Reframe:�You�never�finish�designing�your�life—life�is�a�joyous�and�never-ending
design�project�of�building�your�way�forward.
Some�of�you�are�reading�this�book�to�improve�a�life�that’s�already�pretty�okay;
others�are�reading�this�book�as�part�of�a�significant�transition�that�you’ve�either
intended�or�that�reality�has�thrust�upon�you.�You�have�important�plans�to�execute,
you�have�choices�to�make,�and�once�you�do�that,�your�life�will�be�quite�different
from�what�it�used�to�be.�In�that�sense,�your�new�design�will�be�in�place�and�the�old
design�will�be�behind�you—and�that�shift�is�indeed�a�big�deal.�You�can�really�feel�it.
But�your�life�designing�is�not�over.
So,�if�wayfinding�is�how�you�found�your�way�into�the�life�design�you�want�to
live,�then�it’s�also�the�way�to�live�it.�Just�keep�building�your�way�forward.�Design
isn’t�just�a�technique�to�address�problems�and�projects—it’s�a�way�of�living.�One�of
the�reasons�that�design�thinking�has�worked�so�well�in�our�Designing�Your�Life
classes�and�consulting�is�that�it’s�so�human.�In�1963,�when�Stanford�first�began
teaching�design,�it�was�with�the�unique�approach�of�conceiving�“human-centered
design”�(HCD).�At�the�time,�this�was�a�significant�departure�from�classical�design
methodologies,�which�were�skill-centered,�or�art-centered,�or�engineering-centered,
or� manufacturing-centered.� And� the� early� work� that� went� into� developing� the
Stanford�design�methodology�did�a�very�good�job�of�keeping�humanness�at�the
center�of�things�and�getting�the�humanity�part�right.�Since�your�life�is�a�decidedly
human�enterprise,�it�makes�sense�that�human-centered�design�applies�well.
Further,�in�life�design�we�only�take�on�the�question�of�how�to�design�your�life—
not�what�life�you�should�live�or�why�one�life�is�better�than�another.
Our�friend�Tim�graduated�from�college�with�a�degree�in�electrical�engineering
and�went�to�work�in�Silicon�Valley.�His�first�job�was�in�a�fast-pace,�just-gone-public
start-up�where�he�was�designing�cutting-edge�microprocessors.�However,�after�his
first� design� project� got� canceled,� Tim� re-evaluated� all� those� long� nights� and
weekends� and� came� to� the� conclusion� that� work� was� not� going� to� be� the� main
focus�of�his�life.�He�valued�play�and�love�much�more,�and�realized�that�he�needed
to�make�some�changes.
He� switched� jobs� to� a� more� mature� company,� rose� to� a� comfortable� senior
position,�and�then�just�stayed�there.�He’s�been�in�that�role�for�almost�twenty�years,
having�become�very�well�respected�as�a�technical�guru�in�his�firm,�and�has�turned
down�promotions�and�the�money�that�comes�with�one�again�and�again.
“You� have� to� make� enough� money� to� pay� the� bills� and� have� the� things� you
need,”�says�Tim.�In�his�case,�this�means�supporting�his�family,�making�sure�his
kids�have�access�to�a�great�education,�and�having�a�nice�house�in�Berkeley.�“After
that,� what’s� the� point?� I’d� rather� have� more� fun� and� more� friends.� Money,
promotions,�and�more�responsibility�do�not�motivate�me.�The�point�of�having�a
good�life�is�to�be�happy,�not�to�work.”
Tim’s�design�is�working,�and�he’s�one�of�the�most�balanced�guys�we�know.�He�is
a�great�dad�and�the�center�of�a�vibrant�social�life,�has�lots�of�friends,�plays�music
almost�every�week,�has�his�own�cocktail�blog,�on�which�he�promotes�his�cocktail
inventions,� reads� a� lot,� and� is� one� of� the� happiest� people� you’ll� ever� meet.� His
health�work�play�/�love�dashboard�is�full�of�green�lights,�and�he�plans�to�keep�it
that� way.� And� he’s� a� great� example� of� a� well-thought-out� life� design� strategy� in
which�work�isn’t�the�most�important�thing.
Disrupting�Life
Some�of�the�reframes�we’ve�offered�may�be�disruptive;�unlearning�things�is�often
harder� and� more� important� than� learning� things.� But� we’ll� wager� that� none� of
what�you’ve�learned�or�unlearned�in�your�sojourn�through�this�book�with�us—as
disruptive�or�obvious�or�upsetting�or�enlightening�as�it�might�be—will�actually�turn
you�into�a�different�person.�We�anticipate�that�it�will�just�make�you�more�like�you.
This�is�what�good�design�always�does:�it�releases�the�best�of�what�was�already�there
waiting�to�be�found�and�revealed.�Since�the�foundation�of�our�design�methodology
is�and�always�has�been�an�explicitly�human�process�that�is�applied�iteratively,�it
stands�to�reason�that�it�offers�not�only�an�innovative�approach�to�conceiving�the
life�you�want�but�a�way�to�go�about�living�it�as�well.�Which�brings�us�back�to�the
five�mind-sets.
We�introduced�the�idea�of�life�design�in�this�book�by�telling�you�five�simple
things�you�need�to�do:�(1)�be�curious�(curiosity),�(2)�try�stuff�(bias�to�action),�(3)
reframe�problems�(reframing),�(4)�know�it’s�a�process�(awareness),�and�(5)�ask�for
help�(radical�collaboration).�We’ve�reminded�you�of�these�mind-sets�throughout
the�book�as�we’ve�walked�through�the�various�ideas�and�tools�that�constitute�life
design.
You�can�apply�some�of�the�five�mind-sets�virtually�anywhere,�on�any�given�day.
The�opportunities�to�live�into�being�curious�or�to�try�stuff�are�endless.�We�run�an
exercise�in�our�classes�called�Designing�Your�Way�Forward,�in�which�we�have�our
students�identify�two�or�three�things�in�their�life�design�project�that�they�are�stuck
on,� things� that� are� going� nowhere� fast.� We� then� ask� them� to� ideate� for� four
minutes�on�that�stuck�problem�with�two�other�students,�who�will�help�them�apply
any�one�of�the�five�mind-sets�as�a�way�to�get�unstuck.�How�can�“be�curious”�help
you� overcome� the� fear� of� talking� to� the� Nobel� Prize–winning� professor� who
teaches�your�class?�Well…you�could:�Ask�three�other�students�who�met�with�her
what�they�talked�about�and�how�it�went.�See�if�she�talks�about�her�own�college
experience�anywhere�in�some�article�or�interview,�and�if�her�twenty-year-old�self
shares�anything�with�yours.�Find�out�if�she’s�ever�failed�miserably�at�some�projects
(and�what�they�were�if�so),�to�make�her�seem�more�human�and�less�scary.�And�so
on.�When�we�do�this,�it�turns�out�that�applying�any�of�the�mind-sets�can�help�you
get�unstuck�and�take�some�progressive�next�steps.�The�same�is�true�for�the�well-
lived�life�you’re�now�trying�to�engage.�Here�are�some�reminders�for�each�of�the
mind-sets.
Be�Curious.�There’s�something�interesting�about�everything.�Endless�curiosity�is
key� to� a� well-designed� life.� Nothing� is� boring� to� everyone� (even� doing� taxes� or
washing�the�dishes).
What�would�someone�who’s�interested�in�this�want�to�know?
How�does�it�work?
Why�do�they�do�it�that�way?
How�did�they�used�to�do�it?
What�do�experts�in�this�field�argue�about�and�why?
What’s�the�most�interesting�thing�going�on�here?
What�don’t�I�get�about�what’s�happening�here?
How�could�I�find�out?
Try�Stuff.�With�a�bias�to�action,�there�is�no�more�being�stuck—no�more�worrying,
analyzing,�pondering,�or�solving�your�way�through�life.�Just�do�it.
How�can�we�try�this�before�the�day�is�out?
What�would�we�like�to�know�more�about?
What�can�I�do�that�will�answer�that?
What�sorts�of�things�are�actionable,�and�if�we�tried�them,�what�might�we�learn?
Reframe�Problems.�Reframing�is�a�change�in�perspective,�and�almost�any�design
problem�can�use�a�perspective�switch.
What�perspective�do�I�actually�have?
Where�am�I�now�coming�from?
What�other�perspectives�could�other�people�have?�Name�them,�and�then�describe
the�problem�from�their�perspective,�not�yours.
Redescribe� your� problem� using� some� of� the� following� reframe� lenses:� Your
problem� is� actually� very� small.� Very� easy� to� fix.� An� opportunity� more� than� a
problem.� Something� you� can� just� skip� entirely.� Something� you� actually� don’t
understand�at�all�yet.�Not�your�problem.�And�how�will�it�look�a�year�later?
Know�It’s�a�Process.�Awareness�of�the�process�means�you�don’t�get�frustrated�or
lost,�and�you�don’t�ever�give�up.
What�are�all�the�steps�behind�you�and�in�front�of�you�that�you�can�imagine?
Is�what’s�on�your�mind�actually�germane�to�the�step�you’re�on�now?
Are�you�on�the�right�step,�or�are�you�ahead�of�or�behind�yourself?
What�happens�if�you�don’t�think�more�than�one�step�ahead?
What’s� the� worst� thing� that� can� happen?� How� likely� is� it� to� happen,� and� what
would�you�do�if�it�did?
What’s�the�best�thing�that�can�happen?
Write�down�all�the�questions,�worries,�ideas,�and�hopes�that�you�have,�and�then
ask�yourself�if�you�know�what�to�do�next.�Does�it�feel�different�now?
Ask� for� Help.�Radical�collaboration�means�that�you�aren’t�alone�in�the�process.
Find�a�supporter�you�can�talk�to�about�what�you’re�in�the�midst�of—right�now.�Tell
this�person�your�situation�for�five�minutes,�and�ask�for�five�minutes�of�feedback
and�discussion.�How�do�you�feel�now�(regardless�of�what�your�supporter�said—just
talking�to�someone�other�than�yourself)?�There�are�lots�of�ways�to�get�collaboration
started:
Build�a�team.
Create�a�community.
Who� are� all� the� different� groups� and� constituencies� involved� in� what� you’re
working�on?�Are�you�connected�to�and�in�conversation�with�all�of�them?�If
not—get�going.
Keep�an�ask-for-help�journal�in�which�you�jot�down�the�questions�you�want�help
on,�and�keep�it�handy.�Each�week,�identify�some�people�who�can�help�you
with�some�of�the�journal�entries�and�reach�out�to�them.�Journal�answers�and
results�from�your�helpers.
Find�a�mentor.
Call�your�mother�(she’d�love�it—you�know�she�would).
If�you�try�to�keep�the�mind-sets�as�an�active�orientation�to�how�you’re�living�and
use� them� as� part� of� your� life� design� implementation� as� well� as� part� of� your
innovation�process,�you’ll�very�quickly�get�the�hang�of�it.�It’s�a�simple�list,�and�it
takes�almost�no�effort�to�bring�these�mind-sets�to�the�forefront�of�your�thinking
and� see� if� they� can� serve� you.� In� short� order,� you’ll� find� a� natural,� organic
adoption�of�the�mind-sets�as�part�of�your�own�way.
Just�Two�More�Things
Beyond�the�five�mind-sets,�there�are�two�more�things�that�you�particularly�want�to
pay�attention�to�in�living�your�well-designed�life—your�compass�and�your�practices.
Your� compass� is� about� those� great� big� organizing� ideas� of� your� Workview� and
Lifeview.�These,�along�with�your�values,�provide�the�foundation�for�your�answer�to
“How’s�it�going?”�They�inform�you�if�you�are�on�a�good�track�for�you,�or�are�out
of� sync� with� yourself.� They� determine� if� you’re� living� a� coherent� life� in� which
you’ve� got� who� you� are,� what� you� believe,� and� what� you’re� doing� in� adequate
alignment.� When� we� talk� to� our� students� two,� three,� five,� or� more� years� after
they’ve� graduated� and� left� our� class,� they� say� that� their� compass� is� one� of� the
exercises�they�keep�coming�back�to.�Most�of�us�find�that�our�primary�views�on
these� questions� stay� fairly� constant,� but� the� specifics� and� the� nuances� and� the
priorities�do�change,�and�it’s�very�helpful�to�stay�on�top�of�that.�The�best�way�to
know� what� you� really� think� and� value� about� the� big� questions� of� life� is� to� ask
yourself�and�see�what�you�have�to�say.�We�urge�you�to�revisit�your�compass�at�least
annually,�and�recalibrate�it.�This�will�help�you�revitalize�the�creation�of�meaning�in
your�life.
Perhaps�the�most�important�recommendation�we�can�give�you�to�sustain�a�well-
designed�life�is�to�invest�in�and�commit�to�some�personal�practices�of�the�variety�we
described�in�chapter�9.�In�our�own�lives,�both�of�us�would�say�that�our�personal
growth�in�this�area—the�refinement�and�disciplined�participation�in�practices—has
been�the�single�most�life-giving�thing�we’ve�done.�Even�though�appreciation�of�the
value�of�such�practices�(yoga,�meditation,�poetry�writing/reading,�prayer,�etc.)�is
gaining� ground,� this� remains� an� area� of� great� weakness,� especially� in� modern
society.� Traditional� Eastern� cultures� are� better� at� it,� but,� frankly,� almost� no
modern�cultures�excel�here.�The�good�news�is�that�even�a�small�effort�can�bring
great�results.�By�educating�your�emotions�and�maturing�your�discernment�through
such�practices,�you�stand�to�reap�great�benefits�that�are�accessible�on�an�almost
daily�basis.
For�example,�Bill�is�nourished�by�a�morning�meditation�(done�while�shaving)
and�the�daily�affirmation�he�referred�to�on�his�health�dashboard:�“I�live�in�the�best
of� all� possible� worlds.� Everything� I� do� today,� I� choose� to� do.”� And� then� he
recounts�in�his�mind�everything�in�front�of�him�that�day,�reminds�himself�that�all
those�things�are�things�he�put�there,�and�then�re-chooses�them�before�entering�the
day.�He�also�now�dedicates�significant�time�each�week�to�painting�and�drawing�to
animate�his�creative�brain�and�experience�the�pure�joy�of�it.�And�he�makes�at�least
one�complex�if�not�gourmet�meal�a�week,�to�do�something�creative�that�others�can
share�in.
Dave� works� to� spend� twenty� minutes� a� day� in� silent� meditation� (technically
“centering� prayer”)� to� recenter� himself� in� the� love� of� God.� He� also� now� reads
poetry�at�least�once�a�week,�trying�to�learn�how�to�feel�the�poem�in�his�body,�not
just�read�it�in�his�head.�He�relies�on�his�erudite�wife,�Claudia,�to�curate�his�poetry
assignments,�since�he�cleverly�designed�a�marriage�with�a�much�smarter�spouse.
And�he�forgoes�the�speed�and�thrill�of�road�cycling�as�exercise�once�a�week�to�walk
in�the�hills�for�at�least�four�miles�with�Claudia�and�the�dogs,�to�slow�things�down
and�see�nature�more�intimately.
These�are�some�of�the�things�we�do,�but�we�hope�you�will�build�and�prototype
your�own�set�of�practices�to�find�what�works�for�you�and�helps�you�to�live�your
own�well-designed�life.
So—How’s�It�Going?
At�the�beginning�of�this�book,�we�introduced�you�to�Ellen�who�liked�rocks,�Janine
the�misplaced�lawyer,�and�Donald�the�lost�manager.�How�did�life�design�change
the�way�they�used�to�answer�the�difficult�question�“How’s�it�going?”�into�the�way
they�answer�it�now?
Ellen�knew�she�didn’t�want�to�be�a�geologist,�but�she�also�knew�that�she�loved
some�parts�of�what�she�learned�in�school,�especially�the�organizing�and�cataloguing
that�come�with�being�a�geologist.�And�she�still�liked�rocks,�especially�the�fine�gems
used�in�jewelry.�So�she�decided�to�get�good�at�being�lucky�and�started�Life�Design
Interviewing.� She� discovered� that� project� management� jobs� require� people� who
excel�at�organizing�and�categorizing�tasks�and�people.�That�felt�like�a�fit�to�her.
After�a�few�more�interviews,�she�networked�her�way�to�a�start-up�that�was�doing,
among�other�things,�online�jewelry�auctions.�Her�love�of�“rocks”�and�her�natural
organizational�talent�came�through�in�the�conversation,�and�her�curiosity�about
the�company�really�stood�out.�The�Life�Design�Interview�quickly�turned�into�a�job
interview.�Two�years�and�several�promotions�later,�she�is�now�the�account�manager
for�everything�the�company�does�in�their�high-fashion�auction�business.
Janine� really� worked� on� her� compass� and� developed� personal� practices� that
helped�her�to�recognize�and�trust�her�own�inner�voice.�She�found�journaling�life-
giving� and� eventually� recognized� that� the� reason� journaling� had� become� so
important� to� her� was� that� she� is� a� writer—a� poet,� actually.� After� she� had� been
working�on�her�writing�on�the�side�for�a�time,�she�and�her�husband�decided�it�was
time�for�her�to�“go�for�it,”�and�she�entered�an�M.F.A.�poetry�graduate�program;�she
has�now�begun�a�new�(and�frugal)�life�as�a�speaker,�writer,�and�poet.
Donald�used�the�mind-set�of�curiosity�to�reframe�his�complaint,�“Why�the�hell
am�I�doing�this?,”�into�a�new�question,�“What�is�so�interesting�around�there�that�it
keeps�all�these�people�coming�back�to�this�company�day�after�day?”�He�followed
that�question�into�lots�of�Life�Design�Interviews�with�his�colleagues,�looking�for
the�ones�who�were�really�enjoying�themselves�and�had�figured�out�just�what�the
hell�they�were�doing�there.�When�he�combined�his�insights�from�those�stories�with
the�results�from�his�Good�Time�Journal,�the�pattern�was�clear.�The�way�to�get�re-
energized�was�to�refocus�on�the�people.�He�discovered�that�he�wasn’t�in�the�wrong
place,�he�was�just�in�the�wrong�state�of�mind.�He’d�gotten�so�preoccupied�with�the
what� and� the� how� of� business� success� and� family� responsibilities� that� he’d
completely�forgotten�the�why�and�the�who.�He�reinvented�himself�without�having
to�change�anything�about�his�situation.�Reframing�his�work�from�“getting�the�job
done”�to�“creating�a�dynamic�culture�where�my�employees�love�their�work”�was
transformative.
Neither�Ellen,�Janine,�nor�Donald�(nor�Clara,�Elise,�Kurt,�Chung,�or…)�used�all
the� tools,� but� they� all� took� up� the� challenge,� got� unstuck,� and� built� their� way
forward.�We�are�grateful�to�have�known�them�and�to�have�been�a�small�part�of
their�lives.
We� know� that� writing� a� book� called� Designing� Your� Life� gives� each� of� us� the
opportunity� to� be� either� a� living� example� of� how� this� stuff� works� or� a� big
hypocrite.�We�each�put�these�ideas�and�tools�to�work�on�a�daily�basis,�and�we�are
constantly�prototyping�new�exercises,�new�ways�of�thinking,�and�new�ways�of�living
into�a�well-designed�life.�We�have�shared�with�you�some�of�our�daily�practices,�and
encourage�you�to�go�to�our�website�(www.designingyour.life)�for�a�complete�list�of
daily�practices�you�might�like�to�try.
Our�lives�are�constantly�evolving—from�engineers,�to�consultants,�to�teachers,�to
authors—and� with� each� step� of� the� journey� we� are� constantly� grateful� and
perpetually�curious�to�see�what�our�well-designed�life�will�look�like�next.
Throughout�this�book,�we’ve�shared�with�you�the�stories�of�many�people�we’ve
worked�with�and�gotten�to�know�along�the�way.�Though�not�everyone�is�“living�the
dream,”� we� can� say� with� an� informed� confidence� that� every� one� of� our
collaborators�who�has�put�into�practice�at�least�some�(if�not�all)�of�these�tools�and
ideas�has�made�real�progress�in�ways�none�of�them�had�experienced�before.
We� have� enjoyed� a� long� and� radical� collaboration� with� each� other� and� with
thousands�of�students�and�clients�who�have�embarked�on�the�journey�of�life�design
with�us,�and�we�look�forward�to�collaborating�with�you.
We�hope�you�will�let�us�know�how�it’s�going,�but,�more�important,�we�hope�you
are�able�to�answer�“How’s�it�going?”�satisfyingly�for�yourself.
Life�design�is�ultimately�a�way�of�life�that�will�transform�how�you�look�at�your
life�and�how�you�live�your�life.�The�end�result�of�a�well-designed�life�is�a�life�well
lived.
And,�really,�is�there�anything�more�we�could�hope�for?
Acknowledgments
There�are�many�people�who�have�been�important�and�encouraging�on�the�road�to
writing� this� book.� At� the� great� risk� of� leaving� someone� out,� we� wish� to
acknowledge:
Eugene�Korsunskiy�and�Kyle�Williams,�our�founding�Life�Design�Fellows,�for
believing�in�us�and�for�working�hard�in�their�crucial�role�getting�the�Lab�started.
The� Stanford� d.Life� Fellows� Jon� Kleiman,� Gabriel� Lomeli,� Gabriel� Wilson,
Kristin� Mayer,� Kathy� Davies,� Gabrielle� Santa-Donato,� and� Lauren� Pizer� for
embodying�“radical�collaboration”�and�helping�grow�Designing�Your�Life�into�a
gift�for�everyone.
David� Kelley,� for� creating� the� position� of� executive� director� of� Stanford’s
Product�Design�program�for�me�(Bill),�letting�me�teach�whatever�I�wanted,�and
starting�the�journey�that�led�to�this�book.
Professor� Sheri� Sheppard� for� being� a� stalwart� DYL� supporter,� heroic� grad
student�advocate,�and�artful�faculty�mentor�willing�to�take�a�gamble�on�a�couple�of
guys�with�mere�master’s�degrees.
To�the�forward-thinking�leaders�at�Stanford�who�believed�in�the�power�of�Life
Design� and� paved� the� way� for� changing� the� university� and,� hopefully,� higher
education:� Harry� Elam,� Ph.D.,� vice� provost� of� undergraduate� education;� Patti
Gumport,�Ph.D.,�vice�provost�of�graduate�education;�Brad�Osgood,�Ph.D.,�former
dean�of�students,�School�of�Engineering;�Greg�Boardman,�vice�provost�of�student
affairs.
A�special�recognition�to�our�first�collaborators�who�partnered�with�us�in�the
very�early�days�and�whose�years�of�support�and�encouragement�have�made�all�the
difference:� Scotty� McClennan,� dean� of� religious� life� (retired),� who� modeled
patience�and�persistence�in�bringing�cultural�change;�Shari�Palmer,�associate�vice
provost�of�undergraduate�education,�who�coached�us�on�how�the�university�thinks;
Lance� Choy,� former� executive� director� of� the� career� development� center,� who
broke� it� all� open� when� he� asked� the� seminal� question� “Can’t� you� do� this� for
students�in�every�major?”;�and�Julie�Lythcott-Haims,�former�dean�of�freshmen,�who
pushed� us� to� reach� out� to� the� entire� student� body,� energized� us� with� reliable
encouragements,� and� showed� us� the� way� to� growing� DYL� beyond� ourselves� by
becoming�our�first�certified�co-instructor.
Lindsay� Oishi,� Ph.D.,� and� Tim� Reilly,� Ph.D.,� who� made� the� huge� personal
investment� of� dedicating� their� doctoral� research� projects� to� demonstrating� the
efficacy�of�DYL,�and�in�so�doing�set�our�work�apart�and�ensured�we�gave�people
what�they�deserved.�To�Professors�Dan�Schwartz�and�Bill�Damon,�their�advisers,
for� their� support� and� guidance,� and� Dr.� Denise� Pope,� founder� of� Challenge
Success,�for�her�careful�research�insights�and�demonstration�that�you�can�change
the�education�system.
Randy�Bare,�then�director�of�Westminster�House�at�the�University�of�California
at�Berkeley,�for�innocently�suggesting�to�me�(Dave)�in�1999,�“You�should�teach�a
course�here!,”�and�kicked�off�my�fourth�career�as�an�educator.
Dr.�Sharon�Daloz-Parks,�who�asked�me�(Dave)�with�uncanny�prescience�so�many
years�ago,�“Are�you�ready�for�where�this�will�take�you?,”�and�has�never�flagged�in
her�soulful�support�and�loving�exhortation.
Bob�McKim,�who�created�the�Product�Design�program�at�Stanford�and�rescued
a�lost�physics�major�(Bill),�starting�me�on�a�career�that�has�been�so�much�fun.�And
Bernie�Roth,�a�mentor�and�guide,�and�the�one�person�we�turn�to�when�we�have�to
figure�out�university�politics.
Jim�Adams,�who�inspired�both�of�us�as�undergraduate�students�and�taught�us�to
bust�conceptual�blocks,�including�the�one�he�put�in�front�of�us�in�2007�when�he
said,�“I�don’t�know�how�you�guys�could�actually�teach�this�stuff!,”�which�spurred
us�to�figure�out�how�to�do�it.
And�to�those�special�people�whose�lives�appear�between�these�pages�to�help�us
show�you�how�life�design�really�works.�We’ve�borrowed�their�stories�to�help�you
write� yours� (and,� of� course,� we’ve� changed� their� names).� For� their� invaluable
contribution�to�personalizing�and�humanizing�this�book,�we�are�forever�grateful.
There�are�two�special�people�who�made�this�book�possible�in�the�most�tangible
way:
Lara�Love,�our�collaborative�writer,�for�finding�the�true�voice�of�Bill-and-Dave
and�crafting�the�words�we’d�have�written�if�we�were�real�writers�like�she.�We�so
appreciate� her� patience� in� enduring� countless� hours� of� meetings,� videos,� and
recordings�with�no�weakening�of�her�ardor�for�the�work�or�sincere�affection�for�us.
When� our� own� energies� were� flagging,� we� could� simply� borrow� from� her
bottomless� well� of� cheerful� readiness� and� productive� availability.� Lara
demonstrated�an�incredible�ability�to�listen�deeply�and�then�write�us�perfectly.�She
did�not�write�for�us�or�about�us�or�on�behalf�of�us.�She�wrote�us,�and�we�and�every
one�of�our�readers�are�well�served�by�her�fine�work.
Doug�Abrams,�our�agent,�book�co-inventor,�idea�architect,�publishing�industry
tour�guide,�honest�friend,�and�all-around�great�collaborator.�It’s�safe�to�say�that
without�Doug�this�book�wouldn’t�have�happened.�After�our�first�failed�attempt�at
writing�a�draft�that�was�essentially�a�boring�script�of�our�class,�we�knew�we�needed
help.�Doug�became�our�book�design�consultant�and�led�the�effort�to�figure�out
what�book�it�really�was�that�we�had�to�offer�the�world�and�how�to�architect�it�well
for�our�reader.�Doug�the�book�designer�taught�us�what�a�book�was.�Then�Doug�the
agent�swung�into�action,�dropped�the�velvet�rope�into�the�publishing�world,�and
said,�“Follow�me,�guys—get�ready�for�the�ride�of�your�life.”�It’s�been�a�great�ride�so
far,�and�we�can’t�wait�to�see�what�comes�next.
Finally,�we’d�like�to�thank�the�whole�extraordinary�team�at�Knopf,�but�one�book
champion� at� the� publisher’s� stands� alone—Vicky� Wilson,� our� editor� and� chief
culture�change�officer.�We�cannot�describe�adequately�the�difference�it�has�made�to
have�Vicky�lead�the�charge�to�put�this�book�into�the�world.�Her�commitment�to
the�book�and�to�us�was�immediate.�She�is�a�force�of�nature,�and�the�book’s�success
is�unconditionally�rooted�in�her�decision�to�bring�it�into�being.�Her�confidence�in
and�vision�for�the�cultural�contribution�Designing�Your�Life�can�make�has�been�our
dependable� fount� of� renewable� energy.� Even� experienced� designers� need
inspiration,�and�Vicky�has�provided�it�to�us�without�pause�from�the�moment�we
met.�Vicky,�you�had�us�at�“Hello�darlings…”—and�it�was�one�of�the�best�things�that
ever�happened�to�us.�Thank�you,�thank�you,�Vicky.
Notes
Introduction:�Life�by�Design
1. Jon�Krakower,�inventor�of�the�Apple�notebook�configuration,�see�European
Patent�EP�0515664�B1,�Laptop�Computer�Having�Integrated�Keyboard,�Cursor
Control�Device�and�Palm�Rest,�and�Artemis�March,�Apple�PowerBook�(A):
Design�Quality�and�Time�to�Market,�Design�Management�Institute�Case�Study�9-
994-023�(Boston:�Design�Management�Institute�Press,�1994).
2. Lindsay�Oishi,�“Enhancing�Career�Development�Agency�in�Emerging
Adulthood:�An�Intervention�Using�Design�Thinking,”�doctoral�dissertation,
Graduate�School�of�Education,�Stanford�University,�2012.�T.�S.�Reilly,
“Designing�Life:�Studies�of�Emerging�Adult�Development,”�doctoral
dissertation,�Graduate�School�of�Education,�Stanford�University,�2013.
3. To�learn�more�about�these�companies,�visit�http://embraceglobal.org�and
https://d-rev.org.
4. William�Damon,�The�Path�to�Purpose:�How�Young�People�Find�Their�Calling�in�Life
(New�York:�Free�Press,�2009).
Chapter�2���Building�a�Compass
1. We�have�drawn�many�of�our�ideas�and�exercises�from�the�work�of�the�positive
psychology�movement,�and�especially�from�the�work�of�Martin�Seligman.�The
notion�that�“people�who�can�make�an�explicit�connection�between�their�work
and�something�socially�meaningful�to�them�are�more�likely�to�find�satisfaction,
and�are�better�able�to�adapt�to�the�inevitable�stresses�and�compromises�that
come�with�working�in�the�world”�is�one�of�the�important�ideas�in�Seligman’s
book�Flourish:�A�Visionary�New�Understanding�of�Happiness�and�Well-Being�(New
York:�Atria�Books,�2012).
Chapter�3���Wayfinding
1. For�more�information�on�the�concept�of�flow,�see�Flow:�The�Psychology�of
Optimal�Experience�by�Mihaly�Csikszentmihalyi�(New�York:�Harper�Perennial,
2008).
2. See�Suzana�Herculano-Houzel’s�TED�Talk�“What’s�so�special�about�the�human
brain?,”�https://www.ted.com/talks/suzana_herculano_houzel_what_is_
so_special_about_the_human_brain;�and�Nikhil�Swaminathan,�“Why�Does
the�Brain�Need�So�Much�Power?,”�Scientific�American,�April�29,�2008,
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-does-the-brain-need-s/.
3. The�AEIOU�framework�comes�from�Dev�Patnaik,�Needfinding:�Design�Research
and�Planning�(Amazon’s�CreateSpace�Independent�Publishing�Platform,�2013).
Chapter�5���Design�Your�Lives
1. Steven�P.�Dow,�Alana�Glassco,�Jonathan�Kass,�Melissa�Schwarz,�Daniel�L.
Schwartz,�and�Scott�R.�Klemmer,�“Parallel�Prototyping�Leads�to�Better�Design
Results,�More�Divergence,�and�Increased�Self-Efficacy,”�ACM�Transactions�on
Computer-Human�Interactions�17,�no.�4�(Dec.�2010).
2. In�addition�to�Homer�and�the�Greeks,�we�borrowed�the�term�“odyssey�years”
from�David�Brooks,�the�noted�New�York�Times�columnist.�In�his�October�9,
2007,�column,�Brooks�was�describing�the�new�realities�of�twenty-two-to-thirty-
five-year-old�Americans�when�he�said,�“With�a�little�imagination�it’s�possible
even�for�baby�boomers�to�understand�what�it’s�like�to�be�in�the�middle�of�the
odyssey�years�[italics�added].�It’s�possible�to�see�that�this�period�of�improvisation
is�a�sensible�response�to�modern�conditions.”�David�Brooks,�“The�Odyssey
Years,”�The�Opinion�Pages,�New�York�Times,�October�9,�2007,�http://www.
nytimes.com/2007/10/09/opinion/09brooks.html?_r=0.
Chapter�7���How�Not�to�Get�a�Job
1. From�a�2015�report,�The�Recruitment�Power�Shift:�How�Candidates�Are�Powering�the
Economy,�on�CareerBuilder,�which�can�be�found�at�http://careerbuildercom
munications.com/candidatebehavior/.
Chapter�8���Designing�Your�Dream�Job
1. https://test.naceweb.org/press/faq.aspx.
Chapter�9���Choosing�Happiness
1. Peter�Salovey�and�John�D.�Mayer,�“Emotional�Intelligence,”�Imagination,
Cognition�and�Personality�9�(1990):�185−211.
2. Dan�Goleman�is�the�author�of�Emotional�Intelligence�(New�York:�Bantam,�1995)
and�the�follow-up�book�Social�Intelligence:�The�New�Science�of�Human�Relationships
(New�York:�Bantam,�2006)�from�which�we�draw�the�notion�of�the�“wisdom�of
the�emotions.”�For�an�informative�and�interesting�summary�of�these�ideas�go
to�Dan’s�Social�Intelligence�Talks�at�Google�at�https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=-hoo_dIOP8k.
3. For�more�on�Dan�Gilbert’s�ideas�on�“synthesizing�happiness”�watch�his�TED
Talk,�“The�Surprising�Science�of�Happiness,”�http://www.ted.com/talks/dan_
gilbert_asks_why_are_we_happy�and�read�Stumbling�on�Happiness�(New�York:
Knopf,�2006).
4. For�more�on�Barry�Schwartz’s�ideas�on�choice�and�choosing�watch�his�TED
Talk,�“The�Paradox�of�Choice?,”�https://www.ted.com/talks/barry_
schwartz_on_the_paradox_of_choice?language=en.
Chapter�10���Failure�Immunity
1. Angela�Duckworth’s�studies�on�grit�and�self-control�are�summarized�in�a�great
article:�Daniel�J.�Tomasulo,�“Grit:�What�Is�It�and�Do�You�Have�It?,”�Psychology
Today,�January�8,�2014,�https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-healing-
crowd/201401/grit-what-is-it-and-do-you-have-it.
2. James�P.�Carse,�Finite�and�Infinite�Games�(New�York:�Free�Press,�1986).
What’s�next�on
your�reading�list?
Discover�your�next
great�read!
Get�personalized�book�picks�and�up-to-date�news�about�this�author.
Sign�up�now.
